An Integrated Model For User Attribute

Discovery: A Case Study on Political Aﬃliation

Identiﬁcation

Swapna Gottipati†, Minghui Qiu†, Liu Yang†,‡, Feida Zhu†, and Jing Jiang†

† School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University

‡ School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University

{swapnag.2010,minghui.qiu.2010,liuyang,fdzhu,jingjiang}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract. Discovering user demographic attributes from social media
is a problem of considerable interest. The problem setting can be gen-
eralized to include three components — users, topics and behaviors. In
recent studies on this problem, however, the behavior between users and
topics are not eﬀectively incorporated. In our work, we proposed an in-
tegrated unsupervised model which takes into consideration all the three
components integral to the task. Furthermore, our model incorporates
collaborative ﬁltering with probabilistic matrix factorization to solve the
data sparsity problem, a computational challenge common to all such
tasks. We evaluated our method on a case study of user political aﬃlia-
tion identiﬁcation, and compared against state-of-the-art baselines. Our
model achieved an accuracy of 70.1% for user party detection task.

Keywords: Unsupervised Integrated Model, Social/feedback networks,
Probabilistic Matrix Factorization, Collaborative ﬁltering

1

Introduction

User demographic attributes such as gender, age, ﬁnancial status, region are
critically important for many business intelligence applications such as targeted
marketing [1] as well as social science research [2]. Unfortunately, for reasons
including privacy concerns, these pieces of user information are not always avail-
able from online social media platforms. Automatic discovery of such attributes
from other observable user behavior online has therefore become an important
research topic, which we call the user attribute discovery problem for short.

Existing work on detecting the user demographics on datasets such as blogs,
micro-blogs and web documents [3,4,5,6,7,8] have mainly adopted the supervised
approach and relied on either the connections among users such as user social
network, or the language aspects in the data, or both. However, in many cases
the interaction between the users and the topics is not eﬀectively incorporated.
The ﬁrst contribution of our work is that we proposed an integrated unsuper-
vised model which takes into consideration all the three components integral to
the user attribute discovery problem, namely the users, the topics and the feed-
back behavior between the user and the topics. In particular, besides social links

2

S.Gottipati, M.Qiu, L.Yang, F.Zhu, J.Jiang

between users, we exploit users’ feedback on topics, which gives great insight
into user aﬃliation that cannot be modeled by current approaches. Although il-
lustrated with the case study on political aﬃliation, our model by design can be
generalized for most other user attributes that are associated with users’ behav-
ior including but not limited to religion aﬃliation, technology aﬃliation, political
aﬃliation etc., We present elaborated motivation for our model in Section 2.

The second contribution of our work is that we proposed a solution to a
computational challenge common to the user attribute discovery problem: data
sparsity — users might not participate in all the huge number of topics and
the user social network could be sparse as sites such as forums and debates are
not meant for maintaining social relations but to voice out public opinions. As
such standard clustering [9] and community detection algorithms [10,11] would
not give satisfactory results. We adopt collaborative ﬁltering with probabilistic
matrix factorization (PMF) [12], a technique that has been successfully applied
for collaborative ﬁltering-based recommendation tasks such as social recommen-
dation [13]. In general, the intuition behind PMF is the assumption that, if two
users have same rating/stance/opinion on item/topic/user, they tend to behave
the same on other items/topics/users. PMF automatically discovers a low-rank
representation for both users and items based on observed rating data. We then
apply clustering algorithms on users to detect the communities of users

Lastly, we evaluated our method on data set collected from the CreateDe-
bate site1, and compared against state-of-the-art baselines as well as degener-
ative versions of our model. Among the various demographic attributes, the
rapidly growing attention for user political aﬃliation is probably the most no-
ticeable [3,14,15]. Therefore in this paper we study our model’s performance on
party aﬃliation detection problem. Our model improves the accuracy and gives
promising results for political aﬃliation detection task.

2 Problem Setting

To motivate our integrated model, we present an analysis of the typical problem
setting of user attribute discovery from social media data. We ﬁrst present an
overview of the data components, followed by a motivating example to demon-
strate the importance of each element as well as the insuﬃciency of each if used
alone. We ﬁnally point out the computational challenge of data sparsity which is
common for a large class of user attributes including political aﬃliation as well
as challenge of integrating model components in a principled approach.

2.1 Data Components

We deﬁne a typical problem setting of discovering user attributes from social
media data to include three components — (I)users, (II)topics and (III)behaviors
— which is illustrated in Figure 1. A topic here is deﬁned as any item like a
movie or abortion that users can feedback/rate upon. Two kinds of behaviors

1 www.createdebate.com

An Integrated Model For User Attribute Discovery

3

are usually available from the social media data, (1) social behavior between
users and (2) feedback behavior of users on topics, which we detail as follows.

Fig. 1: An illustration of users, topics and behaviors. Social links are in user layer and
topic-speciﬁc social links are in topic layers, where solid and dotted links represent
positive and negative links respectively. Feedback behaviors are exhibited through user
feedbacks on topics.
(1) Social behavior between users.
The social behavior can be further categorized into two types. One type is the
topic-independent one which is usually more long-term and stable, e.g., friend-
ship/enmity, which we represent by User Social Matrix. Topic-independent so-
cial behavior is an important component used in several studies for prediction,
recommendation and community detection tasks. The social friendship/enmity
networks can be built from the friendship information or friendship/enmity in-
formation or sender/receiver or follower/followee information depending on the
type of the network structure [14,16]. In Figure 1, under “User” layer, the social
links represent the social matrix.

The other type is the topic-speciﬁc one reﬂecting users relationship on a par-
ticular topic, e.g., agreement/disagreement or thumbsup/thumbsdown on other
user’s feedback for a speciﬁc topic, which we represent by User Interaction Ma-
trix. An important observation is that in forums or debate sites, users tend to
dispute or agree with others on the debate issues by replying directly to the com-
menter. [17] observed that users not only interact with others who share same
views, but also actively engage with whom they disagree. In Figure 1, under
“Topic” layer, the topic-speciﬁc social links represent the interaction matrix. A
pair of users exhibit diﬀerent interactions across topics.
(2) Feedback behavior of users on topics.
We focus on explicit user feedbacks such as ratings or stances on topics that
can be observed as user opinions towards diﬀerent opinion targets, represented
by a User Feedback Matrix. In Figure 1, feedback behaviors are exhibited in
user feedbacks on topics. This model, with slightly diﬀerent variations, has been
adopted by many previous work in social network and media analysis [13] [18].
The diﬀerence is that, while their problem is usually social recommendation, our
task here is to discover users’ implicit attributes.

2.2 Correlation Analysis
In Figure 2, we show the networks from our debate dataset using Gephi2. We
use this data as an example to illustrate two observations.

2 http://wiki.gephi.org

4

S.Gottipati, M.Qiu, L.Yang, F.Zhu, J.Jiang

(a) User social network

(b) User Interaction Network

(c) User Feedback Network

(d) Combined Network

Fig. 2: Visualization of networks from a subset of our corpus. We used ground truth to
represent the nodes and edges. Blue nodes are republicans, purple nodes are democrats,
green edges represent positive(friendship/agreement) links and red edges represent neg-
ative(enmity/disagreement) links. For feedback and combined networks, a link between
users in the network indicates whether these two users hold the same feedback most of
the time(green edge means yes, red edge means no). Modular communities and nodes
in the middle represents small individual communities that are misaligned.

(I) Each type of behavior provides an important insight into users’ political
aﬃliation; For example, Figure 2a), a social network shows more friendships
(green edges) within parties than inter-parties. Figure 2b), an interaction net-
work shows large disagreements (red edges) among users but very few agreements
among them. In Figure 2c), a feedback network, we observe that within parties,
the support on topics (green edges) is high compared to inter-parties. These ob-
servations indicate that both behaviors provide unique and important insights
to users’ attribute aﬃliation.
(II) Each type of behavior alone is not suﬃcient to accurately identify users’ po-
litical aﬃliation. For example, Figures 2a) and 2b) consists of singletons which
make the task of identifying the political aﬃliation harder. For combined net-
work, Figure 2d), we have fewer misaligned users compared to feedback network
indicating the beneﬁts of combining social and feedback behavior.

Combining (I) and (II), we drive home the importance of an integrated model

to consider all the networks.

2.3 Computational Challenge

A common challenge in discovering user attributes from social media is data
sparsity, which is actually shared by all data settings where the number of top-
ics is huge and user participation is sparse. The debate data is a good case in
point from the above analysis. Figure 2d) indicates the beneﬁts of leveraging
the feedback behavior together with social behavior. However, the current ap-
proaches do not cater such integration [19,20,10]. Hence, the second challenge
that arises is integration of the model components.

To overcome the ﬁrst challenge, our solution is motivated by collaborative ﬁl-
tering technique. The second challenge motivates the proposal of solution model

An Integrated Model For User Attribute Discovery

5

that captures all these components in a principled approach. We propose a tech-
nique based on probabilistic matrix factorization (PMF), a collaborative ﬁltering
approach which could be easily extended to incorporate multiple matrices.

3 Solution

We ﬁrst provide some preliminaries of our work. The corpus consists of user data
(proﬁle and network) and debate data (stances and interactions).
User Social Matrix: We use S to denote the user social network where each
entry si,j indicates the relationship between i-th user and j-th user (0 means
enmity and 1 means friendship).
User Interaction Matrix: Each reply argument in our data set has an inter-
action information - Disputed, Support or Clariﬁed to its recipient argument. We
use O to represent agreement (Support and Clariﬁed ) and disagreement (Dis-
puted ) positions between users3. An entry oi,k in O equals to 1 means user i and
user k mostly agree with each other and 0 otherwise. In case of such information
is not available, we can use methods such as [21] to derive interaction network.
User Feedback Matrix: Feedback refers to user stances captured from Side
status of a user. R represents the stances held by diﬀerent users on the various
opinion targets4, where an entry ri,m is a stance score (0 for “Oppose” and 1 for
“Support”) indicating the i-th user’s stance towards the m-th opinion target.
Given the matrices R, S and O, we perform probabilistic matrix factoriza-
tion to derive a low-rank vector representation and based on which we apply
clustering algorithms to detect political communities.

3.1 Probabilistic Matrix Factorization

The original matrix factorization model is proposed in [12]. The model is ex-
tended in [13] to incorporate user social network for recommendation. Our model
is a direct extension on the model from [13], where we add one more user inter-
action matrix into the model. Another diﬀerence is that the user social network
and interaction work are symmetric in our model.
Figure 3 shows the plate notation for the generative model. We assume that
both users and opinion targets are proﬁled by K latent factors. Let ui ∈ RK
denote the vector in the latent factor space for the i-th user, and tm ∈ RK denote
the vector for the m-th opinion target. We assume ui and tm are generated by
Gaussian distributions as in Eqn. 1. We assume the extracted matrices R, S and
O are generated by taking the product of the related entities. Speciﬁcally, the
generation processes of the stance scores ri,m between i-th user and m-th opinion

3 Users with the same stance tend to dispute with each other indicating that stance

matrix and interaction matrix do not overlap.

4 An opinion target is deﬁned as the topic that users can express their opinions on. It
can be either a controversial topic like “Abortion” or “Gun Control” with “support”
or “oppose” stances, or “Does God Exist?” with “Yes” or “No” votes.

6

S.Gottipati, M.Qiu, L.Yang, F.Zhu, J.Jiang

(1)

p(ui|σ2
p(tm|σ2
p(ri,m|ui, tm, σ2
p(si,j|ui, uj, σ2
p(oi,k|ui, uk, σ2

U ) = N (ui|0, σ2
U I),
T ) = N (tm|0, σ2
T I).
R) = N (ri,m|g(uT
i tm), σ2
R),(2)
S) = N (si,j|g(uT
i uj), σ2
S),
O) = N (ri,k|g(uT
i uk), σ2
O).
N (·|µ, σ2) : normal distribution
σ2
(·) : variance parameters
I : identify matrix
g(·) : logistic function

Fig. 3: Our probabilistic matrix factorization model on user stance and social behaviors.
Priors over users and opinion targets are omitted for clarity.

target, the polarity scores si,j between i-th and j-th user and oi,k between i-th
user and k-th user in the matrices R, S and O are in Eqn. 2.

With this generative assumption, if two users are similar in terms of their
dot product in the latent factor space, then they are more likely to have positive
interactions or relations. Similarly, if two users share the same stance on an
opinion target, then they are similar in the latent space. The latent factors can
therefore encode user preferences and similarity between two users in the latent
factor space reﬂects whether they share similar viewpoints.
Let U(K × U ) and T (K × T ) be user and opinion target matrices. To learn U
and T , we need to maximize the posterior of generating all the opinion matrices
R, S and O which is equivalent to minimize the following objective function:

=

I(ri,m)(ri,m − g(uT

i tm))2 +

U(cid:88)

U(cid:88)

i=1

j=1

λ1
2

I(si,j)(si,j − g(uT

i uj))2

L(U,T ,R,S,O)
1
2

T(cid:88)
U(cid:88)
U(cid:88)
U(cid:88)

m=1

i=1

+

λ2
2

i=1

k=1

I(oi,k)(oi,k − g(uT

i uk))2 +

||U||2

F +

λU
2

||T ||2
F ,

λT
2

, λ2 = σ2
R
σ2
O

, λU = σ2
R
σ2
U

, and λT = σ2
R
σ2
T

, I(s) is an indicator function

where λ1 = σ2
R
σ2
S
which equals 1 when s is not empty and otherwise 0.
To optimize the objective function above, we can perform gradient descent
on U and T to ﬁnd a local optimum point. The derivation is similar to [13]. After
we learn U, we apply clustering algorithms to detect political aﬃliations.
Degenerative Models: To examine the eﬀectiveness of the three extracted
matrices studied in our model, we compare our model with a set of its degen-
erative models. We construct degenerative models by considering each matrix
separately: PMF-UT used in [15,12], PMF-UU used in [12] and PMF-AD.

An Integrated Model For User Attribute Discovery

7

3.2 Model Generalization

The attributes supported by our model are associated with user’s behavior,
where the users exhibit a debatable (support/oppose) behavior on topics. For
example, attributes such as religion orientation, political leaning, technology
aﬃliation etc, can be discovered through the users behavior in several debat-
able topics speciﬁc to the attribute. For model generality, the feedback behavior
should be domain speciﬁc and aligned to the user attribute. Similarly, the corre-
sponding social behavior should be captured in the same settings. For example,
for discovering users’ technology aﬃliation e.g., Apple vs Microsoft, the feedback
behavior should be captured for the topics related to technology, e.g., operating
system, software, usability, etc., but not on lifestyle or politics. In our experi-
ments under Section , we show our motivation for deﬁning feedback topics for
political aﬃliation task. To support multi-valued attributes such as multiple
parties, the users can be grouped into the multiple clusters.

4 Experiments

4.1 Dataset

We collected user proﬁle information for registered users and the corresponding
sociopolitical debates’ information in which these users participated in Creat-
edebate.com. In our experiments, we focus on political aﬃliation discovery task.

1773 (145 for evaluation - 63 Democrats and 82 Republicans))
88

Users
Controversial debates
Controversial arguments Abortion(1,423), gun control(1,148), same-sex marriage(1,000),
death penalty(588), universal health care(438), higher
taxes(418), total (5,012)
1540 (68% friendship and 32% enmity links)
2830 (31% agreements and 69% disagreements)

Social network links
Interaction links
Table 1: Some statistics of the data. Interaction links are based on controversial debates.

Testbed. The statistics of the data are also shown in the Table 1. Recall that
the feedback behavior should be domain speciﬁc. For our study, we use only
the two-sided debates on 6 controversial issues which are speciﬁc to political
domain and motivated by party’s beliefs5 listed in Table 1. Since, the sides of
debates associated with the same topic can be ﬂipped, they should be aligned
manually. We engaged two judges to manually label the sides for 88 debates as
suport/oppose to the topic and both of them had perfect agreement (Cohen’s
kappa coeﬃcient is 1).

Matrix generation. Recall that our solution model compromises of three ma-
trices, UU, AD and UT. User social matrix UU (represents user-user matrix
S in the solution) is generated from user friendship/enmity links. User interac-
tion matrix AD (represents agreement/disagreement matrix O in the solution)

5 http://www.diffen.com/difference/Democrat_vs_Republican

8

S.Gottipati, M.Qiu, L.Yang, F.Zhu, J.Jiang

is generated from agreement/disagreement (interaction) links among users. User
feedback matrix UT (represents user-opinion target matrix R in the solution) is
from the user stances (“Support/Oppose”) on the debates (topics).

4.2 Political Aﬃliation Discovery Experiments

The main goal of our study is to discover the political aﬃliation of the user.
Through this experiment, we would like to study not only the model performance
but also the performance of feedback and social behaviors independently.

Experimental settings. The ground truth on the users’ political leaning is
available from the users’ proﬁles. We use all three matrices, UU, AD and UT
described in Section 4.1. Apart from 3 degenerative baseline models described
in Section 3, we consider 3 additional baselines, described as below:
Discussant Attribute Proﬁle (DAP): A recent work [9] proposes to proﬁle
discussants by their attribute towards other targets and use standard clustering
(K-Means) to cluster discussants, and achieves promising results on a similar task
- subgroup detection. We thus incorporate the method on our task by proﬁling
each user by his/her opinions towards other opinion targets and users.
Correlation Clustering (CC): Correlation clustering [20], aids to partition
the corresponding signed network such that positive intra-group links and neg-
ative inter-group links are dense. It is also used in subgroup detection [19]. We
use large scale correlation clustering tool [22] for our baseline.
Louvain Method (LM): Louvain method [23] is an eﬃcient algorithm to ﬁnd
high modularity partitions of large networks, and is widely used in community
detection. When the method produces more than two communities, we align
small communities to one of the two largest communities by maximizing intra-
community positive links and inter-community negative links. Since the method
usually discovers too many communities when applied on sparse disconnected
network (on UU and AD, more than 60 communities detected), we only apply
it on UT and combined(UU+UT+AD) matrices.

In all our experiments, for our model, we set the number of latent factors to
10 as we do not observe big diﬀerence when vary the latent factor size from 10
to 50. For the other parameters in probabilistic matrix factorization methods,
we select the optimal setting for each method based on the average of 10 runs.
λ1, λ2, λU and λT are chosen from {0.1, 0.01}. We use Purity, Entropy [24],
Accuracy and F1 score to evaluate the models.

Results. We ﬁrst present an overall performance of all the methods on combined
(UU, AD, UT) matrix and show F1 measure on the party aﬃliation detection
task in Figure 5. We observe that our model outperforms all the baselines on
the task. It achieves F1 of 74.6% and 64.5% for republicans and democrats
respectively. The best baseline, correlation clustering, achieves F1 of 66.2% and
60.2% for republicans and democrats respectively. In comparison, our model has
8.4% higher performance for republicans and 4.3% higher for democrats.

We present the detailed clustering results in Table 2. We observe that the
combined matrix, (UU+UT+AD) has the highest performance for most of the

An Integrated Model For User Attribute Discovery

9

Fig. 4: F1 measure for controversial issues
Vs all issues on PMF-UT.

Fig. 5: F1 measure on party detection eval-
uation on all models using combined matrix
(UU+UT+AD).

baselines and our model. Our model outperforms all the baseline models with
balanced clusters. From these results, it is evident that combining all the matrices
is important for the political aﬃliation detection. Also, it is evident that the
feedback behavior plays an important role in this task. In particular, from these
results we observe that for data sets such as debates where social relations are
sparse, the feedback behavior of participants aids to bridge the gaps and performs
eﬃciently in political aﬃliation discovery.

Method

UU
E

P

A

P

UT
E

A

P

AD
E

Combined

A

P

E

A

CC
DAP
LM
PMF

0.57 0.99 0.56 0.57 0.98 0.52 0.57 0.99 0.55 0.64 0.91 0.64
0.57 0.99 0.56 0.57 0.98 0.51 0.57 0.98 0.57 0.57 0.98 0.57
N/A N/A N/A 0.61 0.95 0.59 N/A N/A N/A 0.64 0.93 0.63
0.58 0.96 0.58 0.65 0.93 0.65 0.56 0.98 0.54 0.70 0.88 0.70

Table 2: Clustering results for political aﬃliation detection. Combined represents
UU+UT+AD. P, E and A refer to Purity, Entropy and Accuracy, respectively.

Summary. Our model performs with promising results compared to baselines
and original PMF model with an accuracy of 70.1%. We further experimented
on three more degenerated baseline versions of our model, PMF-UUUT, PMF-
ADUT and PMF-UUAD. In each of the baseline version, we remove one matrix
from the original model to learn the latent factor representation. For PMF-
UUUT, we choose UU and UT to learn the latent factor representation. This
model is similar to the one used in [13]. For PMF-ADUT, matrices AD and
UT are used and for PMF-UUAD we use UU and AD matrices. Our model on
combined matrix still outperforms all these baseline degenerated models. Due to
space constraints, we skip the details from Table 2.

4.3 Threats to Validity
Similar to other empirical studies, there are several threats to validity in in-
terpreting the results. One such threat corresponds to the ability to link the
stance(feedback) behavior to political aﬃliation. Our experimental results sup-
ports that leveraging stance behavior aids in political aﬃliation discovery and
we used standard metrics for evaluation.

 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8DemocratsRepublicansControversial IssuesAll Issues 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9DemocratsRepublicansOur ModelDAPLouvianCorrelation Clustering10

S.Gottipati, M.Qiu, L.Yang, F.Zhu, J.Jiang

Another threat corresponds to the topics chosen for the feedback. “Do all
issues that users participate can aid in detecting aﬃliation?” We crawled 1,332
debates and corresponding arguments, 10,833 on all issues. We study the perfor-
mance of our model using users’ leaning on controversial issues versus all issues
and Figure 4 shows F1 measure on the aﬃliation detection. We observe that
UT (controversial topics) outperforms UTall (all topics). For republicans, F1
is 68% which is 6.9% higher than UTall and for democrats, F1 is 60% which
is 11.5% higher than UTall. The results indicate that a user’s stances towards
controversial topics have strong correlations with their political aﬃliation.

Another threat corresponds to the ability to generalize our results. For data
generality, we evaluated with 145 users on political debates which is no way near
the number of users available in all online debates. In future, we plan to extend
our case study to include more users, debates and demographics. For attributes
such as age, gender etc., the controversial topics should be carefully engineered
and the current model cannot be applied directly. For model generality, an in-
teresting future work is to study the cases where users can fall into more than
one group and multi-party situations.

5 Related Work

User proﬁling studies examine users’ interests, gender, sex, age, geo-localization,
and other characteristics of the user proﬁle. [25] aggregated social activity data
from multiple social networks to study the users’ online behavior. For user pro-
ﬁling, many studies took a supervised approach on various datasets; gender
classiﬁcation on blog data [6], age prediction on social networks [7] and location
of origin prediction in twitter [8].

Similar research to user proﬁling studies is community or subgroup detec-
tion. [9] proposed a system that uses linguistic analysis to generate attitude
vectors on ideological datasets. [23] used Louvain method which is based on
modularity optimization to ﬁnd high modularity partitions of large networks.
Subgroup detection is studied in [19] using clustering based techniques. [26]
studied both textual content and social interactions to ﬁnd opposing network
from online forums. In our work, besides user-user social links, we use feedback
behavior which cannot be modeled by current community detection approaches.
Our proposed technique which is based on probabilistic matrix factorization
(PMF) [12], a collaborative ﬁltering based method originally used for recommen-
dation tasks. The PMF method has been applied on social recommendation [13],
news article [18] recommendation, relation prediction [27] [28] and modeling
friendship-interest propagations [16]. In particular,
[12] proposed a PMF model
that combines social network information with rating data to perform social rec-
ommendation and [28] extended PMF for relation prediction task. Our model is
a direct extension on [13] where we model three components: social, interaction
and feedback. Besides this, our model assumes symmetric user social behavior.
Similar to our political aﬃliation task, a line of research was devoted to
discover the political aﬃliations of informal web-based contents like news ar-

An Integrated Model For User Attribute Discovery

11

ticles [29], weblogs [4], political speeches [30] and web documents [3]. Political
datasets such as debates and tweets are explored for classifying user stances[31].
These applications are similar to our task as they are focussed on political con-
tent and relies on left-right beliefs.

For users’ political aﬃliation identiﬁcation on Twitter, using supervised ap-
proaches, [32,14,5] achieved high accuracy and [33] using semi-supervised label
propagation method, achieved high accuracy. These studies report high perfor-
mance just based on textual content or hashtags with strong nuances on political
aﬃliations which are unique Twitter properties. Where as, we proposed an un-
supervised approach and studied on data without special text characteristics.
In our previous work [15], we exploited feedback behavior for the same task.
However, the model performance degrades with high sparsity rate. In this work,
we proposed a principled way to integrate social links and user’s feedback.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed an unsupervised integrated approach based on proba-
bilistic matrix factorization that combines social and feedback behavior features
in a principled way to cater two major challenges - combining integral data com-
ponents and data sparsity. Interesting future work is to study multiple-party
cases and user demographics discovery such as technology or religion.
Acknowledgements. This research/project is supported by the Singapore Na-
tional Research Foundation under its International Research Centre@Singapore
Funding Initiative and administered by the IDM Programme Oﬃce.

References

1. Burke, R.: Hybrid recommender systems: Survey and experiments. User Modeling

and User-Adapted Interaction 12(4) (2002) 331–370

2. Behrman, J.R., Behrman, J., Perez, N.M.: Out of Sync? Demographic and other
social science research on health conditions in developing countries. Demographic
Research 24(2) (2011) 45–78

3. Efron, M.: Using cocitation information to estimate political orientation in web

documents. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 9(4) (2006)

4. Durant, K.T., Smith, M.D.: Mining sentiment classiﬁcation from political web

logs. (WebKDD 2006)

5. Pennacchiotti, M., Popescu, A.M.: Democrats, republicans and starbucks aﬃciona-

dos: user classiﬁcation in twitter. In: KDD ’11. (2011) 430–438

6. Yan, X., Yan, L.: Gender classiﬁcation of weblog authors. (AAAI 2006) 228–230
7. Peersman, C., Daelemans, W., Vaerenbergh, L.V.: Predicting age and gender in

online social networks. In: SMUC. (2011) 37–44

8. Rao, D., Yarowsky, D., Shreevats, A., Gupta, M.: Classifying latent user attributes

in twitter. (SMUC ’2010) 37–44

9. Abu-Jbara, A., Diab, M., Dasigi, P., Radev, D.: Subgroup detection in ideological

discussions. (ACL 2012) 399–409

10. Blondel, V.D., loup Guillaume, J., Lambiotte, R., Lefebvre, E.: Fast unfolding of

communities in large networks. Statistical Mechanics (2008)

12

S.Gottipati, M.Qiu, L.Yang, F.Zhu, J.Jiang

11. Traag, V., Bruggeman, J.: Community detection in networks with positive and

negative links. Physical Review E 80(3) (sep 2009) 036115

12. Salakhutdinov, R., Mnih, A.: Probabilistic matrix factorization. In: Advances in

Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS). Volume 20. (2008)

13. Ma, H., Yang, H., Lyu, M.R., King, I.: Sorec: Social recommendation using prob-

abilistic matrix factorization. In: Proc. of CIKM. (2008)

14. Pennacchiotti, M., Popescu, A.M.: A machine learning approach to twitter user

classiﬁcation. In: ICWSM. (2011)

15. Gottipati, S., Qiu, M., Yang, L., Zhu, F., Jiang, J.: Predicting user’s political party

using ideological stances. In: SocInfo. (2013) 177–191

16. Yang, S.H., Long, B., Smola, A., Sadagopan, N., Zheng, Z., Zha, H.: Like like alike:

joint friendship and interest propagation in social networks. (WWW’11)

17. Yardi, S., Boyd, D.: Dynamic Debates: An Analysis of Group Polarization Over
Time on Twitter. Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society 30(5) (2010) 316–327
18. Pan, R., Zhou, Y., Cao, B., Liu, N.N., Lukose, R., Scholz, M., Yang, Q.: One-class

collaborative ﬁltering. In: In ICDM 2008. (2008)

19. Abu-Jbara, A., Radev, D.: Subgroup detector: a system for detecting subgroups

in online discussions. (ACL 2012) 133–138

20. Bansal, N., Blum, A., Chawla, S.: Correlation clustering. In: MACHINE LEARN-

ING. (2002) 238–247

21. Galley, M., McKeown, K., Hirschberg, J., Shriberg, E.:

Identifying agreement
and disagreement in conversational speech: use of bayesian networks to model
pragmatic dependencies. (ACL 2004)

22. Bagon, S., Galun, M.: Large scale correlation clustering optimization. CoRR (2011)
23. Traag, V., Bruggeman, J.: Community detection in networks with positive and

negative links. Physical Review E 80(3) (2009) 036115

24. Manning, C.D., Raghavan, P., Sch¨utze, H.: Introduction to Information Retrieval.

Cambridge University Press (2008)

25. Benevenuto, F., Rodrigues, T., Cha, M., Almeida, V.: Characterizing user behavior

in online social networks. (ACM SIGCOMM 2009) 49–62

26. Lu, Y., Wang, H., Zhai, C., Roth, D.: Unsupervised discovery of opposing opinion

networks from forum discussions. (CIKM 2012) 1642–1646

27. Singh, A.P., Gordon, G.J.: Relational learning via collective matrix factorization.

(KDD 2008) 650–658

28. Qiu, M., Yang, L., Jiang, J.: Mining user relations from online discussions using

sentiment analysis and probabilistic matrix factorization. In: NAACL. (2013)

29. Zhou, D.X., Resnick, P., Mei, Q.: Classifying the political leaning of news articles

and users from user votes. In: ICWSM. (2011)

30. Dahllf, M.: Automatic prediction of gender, political aﬃliation, and age in swedish
politicians from the wording of their speeches - a comparative study of classiﬁabil-
ity. LLC 27(2) (2012) 139–153

31. Somasundaran, S., Wiebe, J.: Recognizing stances in ideological on-line debates.

(NAACL HLT 2010) 116–124

32. Conover, M., Gon¸calves, B., Ratkiewicz, J., Flammini, A., Menczer, F.: Predicting

the political alignment of twitter users. (SocialCom 2011)

33. Boutet, A., Kim, H.: What’s in Twitter? I Know What Parties are Popular and

Who You are Supporting Now! Number 2 (ASONAM 2012)


