Brownian Bridge Model for High Resolution

Location Predictions

Miao Lin and Wen-Jing Hsu

School of Computer Engineering

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

linm0018@e.ntu.edu.sg, hsu@pmail.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract. Given a person’s current and historical traces, a useful yet
challenging task is to predict the future locations at high spatial-temporal
resolution. In this study, we propose a Brownian Bridge model to pre-
dict a person’s future location by using the individual’s historical traces
that exhibit similarity with the current trace. The similarity of the traces
with the current trace is evaluated based on the notion of edit distance.
The predicted location at the future point in time is a weighted result
obtained from a modiﬁed Brownian Bridge model that incorporates lin-
ear extrapolation. Both Brownian Bridge and linear extrapolation aim
to capture aspects of the individual’s mobility behaviors. Compared to
using either historical records or linear extrapolation method alone, the
proposed location prediction method shows lower mean prediction error
in predicting locations at diﬀerent time horizons.

Keywords: location prediction, Brownian Bridge, GPS.

1

Introduction

With the wide availability of GPS devices, current location-based services and
applications already have high spatial and temporal requirements for predicting
individuals’ future locations [1]. These requirements pose a nontrivial challenge
to location predictions. For instance, in pervasive or mobile computing, the spa-
tial resolution expected of a prediction is in the order of 10 meters and the
temporal resolution can be as high as a few seconds. In [3,2] both the theoret-
ical studies and experimental studies show that individual’s next locations are
highly predictable, which is around 90%, in either cell tower data or GPS data.
However, in two respects these two studies are incomplete. Firstly, the predicted
results in these two studies are too coarse in terms of both spatial and temporal
resolutions. Speciﬁcally, the temporal resolution in two datasets are one hour,
and the spatial resolution in cell tower data is a few kilometers and in GPS data
is around 500 meters [2]. Secondly, the high prediction accuracy indicates the
overall predictability during the entire 14 weeks. This high predictability may
be dominated by the cases when the individuals stay at home or in the oﬃce
for most of the time. However, in certain cases, such as, when making moves,
it may be diﬃcult to predict individual’s next location at high spatial-temporal
resolutions.

V.S. Tseng et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2014, Part II, LNAI 8444, pp. 210–221, 2014.
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014

Brownian Bridge Model for High Resolution Location Predictions

211

In this paper, the location prediction problem is deﬁned as follows. Given a
set of historical positioning records of an individual and a sequence of samples
in the current trace, where all positioning records are GPS readings with a ﬁxed
sampling rate, e.g., 60 seconds, the problem is to predict this individual’s location
in the near future, e.g., 60 seconds, 120 seconds, or 180 seconds later. To achieve
such purpose, a location prediction method making use of historical records while
observing current mobility behaviors is proposed. Since previous studies suggest
that there is a high probability that the individuals will follow previous traces
[3,2], the current trace may be similar to some traces in the past. Therefore,
we propose to use dynamic time warping [4] to measure the similarity between
traces. However, when using similar traces to estimate the future location, there
may not be a record that corresponds exactly to the required point of time,
and hence there is a need to model the individual’s movements in between two
sampled positions. A Brownian Bridge model [12], therefore, is proposed to model
the variance of an inferred location in between two existing sample points. In
the Brownian Bridge model, the location at any time is modeled as a Gaussian
distribution to cater for the measurement errors associated with GPS readings.
A linear extrapolation method is also used to model the individual’s current
mobility behaviors. The predicted location is a combination of the results from
the Brownian Bridge models and the result from the linear extrapolation method.
In order to evaluate our location prediction method, we compare our method
with two baseline methods, namely, the linear extrapolation method and a
method that only uses similar traces. In terms of average prediction errors, the
experimental results show that our method is much better than either method
that uses only linear extrapolation or similar traces alone, in predicting locations
at diﬀerent time horizons.

Our contributions consist of a few parts. Firstly, we propose an algorithm of
applying the edit distance for measuring the similarity between mobility traces.
Secondly, we present and evaluate the Brownian Bridge model for modeling a
person’s movements in between any two sample points. Thirdly, we present a
prediction method that is capable of high spatial-temporal resolution predic-
tion by exploiting the individual’s mobility behaviors in the current trace and
historical records.

2 Related Work

The existing approaches for location prediction can be classiﬁed into two groups.
In the ﬁrst group, individual’s mobility history is constructed based on either
signiﬁcant locations [5,6] or region-of-interest [7], both of which are generated by
applying a clustering method, such as DBSCAN [8] or K-Means [9], on histori-
cal records from either the given person or a large population. Then, according
to the transition records between the signiﬁcant locations or region-of-interest,
a probabilistic model based on either Bayesian theory or Markovian theory is
constructed to infer the next location. A major issue here is that, the con-
structed probabilistic models can be applied to infer the next locations only when

212

M. Lin and W.-J. Hsu

individuals visit the signiﬁcant location; otherwise the model fails. Also, in these
studies, the transition time between two locations is generally disregarded.

In the second group of approaches, the next move is predicted entirely based
on trajectory patterns [10,11]. In such cases, the trajectories are represented as
spatio-temporal items, e.g, a list of locations and the corresponding transition
times. The current trace is matched to the historical records by searching through
the pattern tree. Two methods [10,11] that make use of the trajectory patterns
alone typically suﬀer from the major limitation in the timing allowed for making
predictions, because of the tight coupling between the prediction time and the
sampling rate. Similarly, the trajectory pattern mining method is only applicable
to inferring the location at a point in time for which the corresponding sample
is available in the matched traces; predicting the location at any other time in
between the sampling method is impossible.

3 Trace Distance

Table 1. The meanings of the notations used

Symbol
Ti = {p1, ...ptn}
pi,ti
Ttr
Ti(j : k)
M = {m1, ...mk} The collection of portions of historical traces

Explanation
Trace Ti contains tn sample points
The coordinate and time of ith point
The collection of the traces
A sub-trace from index j to index k

mi.tid, mi.δ(tid, p)

mi.sid, mi.eid
δinit, δthd

that match the current trace
Trace index of a matched result
and the distance of the trace with the target trace
The starting and ending index in the matched trace
Initial and maximum distance threshold

In this section, we describe our method for measuring the distance between
traces based on two ideas. Firstly, there is a high probability for the individuals
to follow the same routes [3,2]; however, the recorded traces may be largely
diﬀerent due to diﬀerent initial recording time or the errors in GPS readings.
Therefore, it should be useful to ﬁnd the most similar subtraces while tolerating
certain degree of inexactness. Secondly, individuals often traverse a route in both
directions. Thus, we compare the traces in both directions and record the results
that satisfy the distance threshold.

According to these ideas, we present a trace matching algorithm Trace-
matching based on dynamic time warping. Note that a matching need not be

starting from the ﬁrst index, but it should always end with the last index |tp|.

This ensures using the last location in ﬁnding a match, which is further elab-
orated in Section 4.3. The matching procedure starts by ﬁnding a sequence of

Brownian Bridge Model for High Resolution Location Predictions

213

save the trace index and starting index to M ;

end if
end for

initial trace starts at index j = 1;

calculate dist = distance(pj, pk);
if dist ≤ δinit then

for each trace Ti ∈ Ttr do
for each point pk ∈ Ti do

Algorithm 1. Trace-matching(Tp, Ttr, δinit, δthd)
1. for each pi ∈ Tp, i ≥ 2 do
2.
3. while j ≤ i do
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22. end for
23. return M

end for
if M is not empty then

k = j + 1;
for k ≤ i do

end if
end for

j = j + 1;break;

end while

M =follow-up-matching(Tp(j : k),M , Ttr, δthd);
if M is empty then

end if

Get candidate trace id j = mi.tid, r = mi.sid, s = mi.eid;
if r < s then

else

end if
Get the inverse partial trace T (cid:2)

T (cid:2)
j = Tj(r : s + 1);
if |Tp| == 2 then
Add a new match mk = {j, s, r};

Algorithm 2. follow-up-matching(Tp,M , Ttr, δthd)
1. for each matching information mi do
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
end if
18.
19. end for
20. return M

update mi = {tid, sid, eid + 1};
update mi = {tid, sid, eid − 1};

end if
Calculate dist = D(Tp, T (cid:2)
j );
if dist < δthd then

j = Tj(r : s − 1);

if r < s then

end if

else

214

M. Lin and W.-J. Hsu

locations in each trace in Ttr, such that each location is within δinit distance to
the initial index in Tp (Line 3 to Line 11). Given the traces with the points within
δinit distance to the initial index of the target trace, we start matching from the
second location of the target trace to the following locations given in Alg. 2. If
there is a matched candidate within a given distance threshold δthd, we output
the matched results. Otherwise, we shorten the current trace by removing the
most temporally-distant one (Line 19), and the matching process repeats.

Alg. 2 describes the follow-up matching steps given the matched traces from
the initial phase. We determine the direction of the matching when calling the
follow-up-matching for the ﬁrst time. Speciﬁcally, if the starting index sid is
less than the ending index eid, the current candidate trace is from index sid
to eid + 1 (Line 3). Otherwise, the current candidate trace is the reverse of the
given trace from index sid to eid − 1. Also, when calling follow-up-matching for
the ﬁrst time, (Line 5), we add an additional piece of information by reversing
the previous matching. The reason is that when comparing two line segments,
we do not consider the direction of each line, therefore the subsequent matching
may be conducted in either direction. The distance of the two traces, given as
D(Tp, T (cid:3)
j), is measured by dynamic time warping [4]. If the distance is less than
the threshold δthd, we update the matching information according to the current
direction, otherwise we remove the current matching.

Here the complexity of the two algorithms is analyzed. In Alg. 1, the most
computationally expensive part is the initial matching. The complexity of ﬁnd-
ing the initial matching in each trace is O(Np), where Np is the total number
of sample points in existing traces. The space requirement is O(Np). In Alg. 2,
the complexity of the matching procedure is O(|Tp|2), where |Tp| is the length of

the target trace. However, once all the current distance values in the matrix are
greater than the threshold, the calculation can be terminated and current match-
ing can be removed. The space requirement is upper-bounded by the distance

matrix of size |Tp|2. Therefore, the overall time complexity is O(|Tp|2). In prac-
data. The overall space requirement is O(|Tp|2).

tice, the time complexity is determined by the longest trace in each individual’s

4 Location Prediction Methods

In this section, we consider the issue of predicting the next location at a speciﬁc
point in time, given a few previous locations and historical trajectories that
match the current trace.

4.1 Method A: Linear Extrapolation

The ﬁrst location prediction method is based on linear extrapolation without
using historical records. We predict the location at time tx based on the last
two locations on the current trace. Let the two locations arise at ti−1 and ti,
and there is no record in current trace in between time ti to tx. In the linear

Brownian Bridge Model for High Resolution Location Predictions

215

extrapolation, the location at time tx is given as

(cid:2)pl = pi + (pi − pi−1)

tx − ti
ti − ti−1

(1)

4.2 Method B: Estimation According to the Distance

The predicted location is the weighted mean location from the results of extend-
ing the matched traces one step further following the matched sequence, where
the weight of each location is proportional to the inverse of the corresponding
edit distance to the current trace1.

4.3 Method C: Estimation by Brownian Bridge

This location prediction method combines the inferred location according to the
Brownian Bridge model of each matched trace.

Preliminary. Brownian Bridge is a random process following a speciﬁc rule to
generate a path between two given locations.
Deﬁnition 1. A one-dimensional Brownian motion [12] W (t) ∈ R is a
continuous-time stochastic process satisfying the following properties: 1)W0 = 0,
2)Wt is almost surely continuous, and 3) for 0 ≤ s ≤ t, Wt has independent
increment, and Wt − Ws ∼ N (0, t − s), where N (μ, σ2) denotes the normal
distribution with mean μ and standard deviation σ.

Deﬁnition 2. Let W (t) be a one-dimensional Brownian motion. Given T > 0,
the Brownian Bridge [12] from W0 = 0 to WT = 0 on [0, T ] is the process
X(t) = W (t) − t

W (T ), where t ∈ [0, T ].

T

The Brownian Bridge from W0 = a to WT = b on [0, T ] is the process

X a→b(t) = a +

(b − a)t

T

+ X(t)

(2)

where X(t) = X 0→0 is the Brownian Bridge given in Def. 2.

, and var(X a→b(t)) = t(T−t)

According to Eq. (2), EX a→b(t) = a + (b−a)t
The Brownian Bridge from a to b is described in the following way. At time t,
the estimated location is chosen from a Gaussian distribution, where the mean
of the Gaussian distribution is given by the linear estimation and the variance
varies with respect to time. Speciﬁcally, the variance increases at time T /2 to
the maximum, and decreases till time T . The property of the variance is very
suitable for modeling the uncertainties about a person’s locations between two

T

.

T

1 Note that this prediction method is only suitable for the case in which the current
trace has the same sampling rate as that of the historical records. Otherwise, this
method may lead to a large error.

216

M. Lin and W.-J. Hsu

known locations. When the predicted time is very close to the time obtained
from the existing position samples, the mobility may not change greatly and the
prediction can be of high accuracy. When the time of interest lies in between the
two actual samples, the accuracy of the prediction result decreases.

In our case, the one-dimensional Brownian Bridge is extended to the two-
dimensional version, where the x and y coordinates vary independently. An ad-
ditional parameter, the variance of each trace σ2
m, is introduced to model the
mobility behaviors in each trace. Therefore, the variance of the estimated loca-
tion is adjusted to 2

var(X a→b(t)) =

t(T − t)

T

σ2
m

(3)

According to the Brownian Bridge model, the method of estimating the loca-
tion at time tx based on the current trace is given as follows. In the current trace,
two existing points pk and pk+1 satisfy that tk < tx < tk+1. When considering
the error of each point, the locations at time tk and tk+1 are generated from
pk ∼ N (μk, σ2
g), where σg = 0.01km is the standard error
of the GPS reading. The location at tx is given as (cid:2)px ∼ N ((cid:2)μx, (cid:2)σ2

g), pk+1 ∼ N (μk+1, σ2

x), where

(cid:2)μx = αkμk + (1 − αk)μk+1
x = t(cid:3)
m + α2
k

αk(1 − αk)σ2

g + (1 − αk)2σ2
where σm is the standard deviation of the trace. αk = tx−tk

σ2

g

(cid:2)σ2

x

tk+1−tk and t(cid:3)

x = tk+1−tk.

(4)
(5)

Location Prediction. Given individual’s current records in the given trace

Tp = {p1, p2, ..., pi}, similar historical traces and a time value tx, where tx > ti,
we focus on predicting the location at the time tx.

Algorithm 3. location-prediction(M , tx, Tp,ip)
1. Normalize the time in trace Tp and the predicted time tx to t(cid:2)

x according to the

initial matched index ip;

2. for each matched trace information mi do
3.

Get trace index j = mi.tid, initial index r = mi.sid, ending index s = mi.eid,
and the edit distance to the current trace δ(p, j);
Normalize the time in the matched trace based on index r;
Get the location with index is and ie in Tj, such that tis < t(cid:2)
Estimate the location (cid:2)pi at time t(cid:2)
tions at index is and ie;

x according to the current trace and the loca-

x < tie ;

4.
5.
6.

7. end for
8. Get the mean location from the list of estimated location (cid:2)pi ∼ N ((cid:2)μi, (cid:2)σi

2), and the
one (cid:2)pl estimated by the linear model given in Eq. (1), where the weight for each
(cid:2)pi is the inverse of the corresponding distance value, and the weight for (cid:2)pl is the
inverse of the initial distance δinit;

2 Due to the space limit, the estimation of the parameter σm is given in [13].

Brownian Bridge Model for High Resolution Location Predictions

217

Alg. 3 presents the details of the location prediction method. Firstly, we nor-
malize the time in both predicted trace and the matched trace according to
the initial matched index (Line 1 and Line 4). This is because the estimated
results for the Brownian Bridge model is highly time dependant. Secondly, the
estimated location (cid:2)pi based on current matched trace is given as a Gaussian
distribution N ((cid:2)μi, (cid:2)σ2
i ), where the parameters are inferred according to Eq. (4)
and Eq. (5), respectively. Lastly, we combine the estimated results from each
Brownian Bridge and also the linear extrapolation result from the current trace.
(cid:2)
k (cid:3)µk

The estimated location (cid:2)pb is given by (cid:2)pb ∼ N ((cid:2)μb, (cid:2)σ2
k=1( w
and (cid:2)σb =
i = 1/δ(p, j), for
1 ≤ k ≤ |M|, and j is the index of the matched trace. For k = |M| + 1,
(cid:2)μ|M|+1 = (cid:2)pl and w(cid:3)
|M|+1 = 1/δinit, which is the result from linear extrapolation.

k. When (cid:2)μk = (cid:2)μi, (cid:2)σk = (cid:2)σi and w(cid:3)

b ), where (cid:2)μb =

(cid:2)

k=1 w
(cid:2)
k

w

(cid:3)|M|

(cid:2)|M|+1

(cid:2)
k(cid:2)
w

(cid:2)
k

(cid:2)σ2

)2

5 Experimental Results

In this section, we compare three location prediction methods.

5.1 Mobility Data

The mobility data used in this study is a subset of the GPS dataset released by
Zheng Yu [14,15]. From this dataset, we extract 40 individual’s trajectories over
14 weeks. The following preprocessing is conducted. Firstly, each individual’s
trajectory is divided into a series of traces based on the time gap between two
GPS points. If the gap is longer than 300 seconds, the sequence will be divided
into diﬀerent traces. Each trace is resampled at the rate of 60 seconds, and the
dataset is denoted as Ttr,60. Each individual’s traces are randomly separately
into a training set and predicting set, where the training set contains 70% of all
the traces and the remaining traces are used to evaluate the location prediction
methods. To cater for the characteristics of individual’s mobility behavior, the
training and prediction steps are separately evaluated on the individual’s own
data. The location of each point indicated by a pair of latitude and longitude
in both latitudinal and
is converted to x and y coordinates according to 0
longitudinal direction [16].

◦

When estimating the standard deviation of each trace ﬁtted by Brownian
Bridge model according to our method [13], among the 3225 training traces in
our dataset for 82.5% of the traces show a standard deviation of less than 0.05
km, with only one trace presents a standard deviation of 0.069 km, and the mean
standard deviation is 0.021 km, indicating that the Brownian Bridge model is
a suitable choice for predicting the location given the locations before and after
the predicting time.

5.2 Location Prediction
In this subsection, we evaluate the location prediction methods based on Ttr,60 in
two respects. Here, ﬁrstly the three location prediction methods are compared.

218

M. Lin and W.-J. Hsu

For each prediction, all the previous locations in the current trace and the time
for prediction are given. The performance is evaluated by the distance of the
predicted location to the actual location in the current trace. Note that when
predicting using the Brownian Bridge model, the estimated mean location is the
result. Also the parameter δthd is tested with the values of 0.3 km, 0.2 km, 0.1
km and 0.05 km, with the initial threshold set to be δinit = 0.05 km in all these
cases.

)

M
K

(
 
s
r
o
r
r
e

0.15
0.14
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
el

 

 

δthd = 0.3
δthd = 0.2
δthd = 0.1
δthd = 0.05

es
w

ew

es
b

eb

Fig. 1. The mean prediction errors in one step location prediction based on three
diﬀerent methods, where eb, ew and el corresponds, respectively, with respect to the
mean prediction error given by the Brnownian Bridge method, prediction results using
similar traces, and the linear extrapolation method. es
b are the results only
using the most similar trace according to the matched results.

w and es

In all the cases tested, the prediction errors given by Method C, the com-
bination of linear extrapolation and Brownian Bridge model, is always lower
than either Method A or Method B that uses linear extrapolation or similar
traces alone, respectively. Secondly, in Method B the choice of using either the
most similar trace or the list of similar traces depends on the distance threshold.
Speciﬁcally, in Method B, when the similarity threshold is large, e.g., δthd = 0.3
or 0.2, the prediction result is adversely inﬂuenced by the most similar trace,
since using only the most similar trace results in a larger mean prediction error
than that by using all the matched traces. However, when the distance threshold
is small, e.g., δthd = 0.1 or 0.05, using the most similar trace is more eﬀective
than using all the matched traces in Method B, which may be due to the stricter
distance criterion in measuring similarity. However, for the prediction results by
Method C, in all the cases mentioned before, making use of the most similar
trace is slightly worse than that obtained by using all the similar traces. This is
because the Brownian Bridge model is able to adjust the prediction with respect
to the given point of time. Thirdly, given δthd = 0.1, Method C is much more
discriminative than both the linear extrapolation method (Method A) and the
prediction using only similar traces (Method B). Speciﬁcally, the mean predic-
tion error for Method C is 0.084 km, while that of the Method A and Method
B is 0.099 km and 0.105 km, respectively.

Brownian Bridge Model for High Resolution Location Predictions

219

Note that the prediction results may be aﬀected by δthd when using either
method B or method C according to the most similar trace. This is because
varying δthd the most similar trace may be diﬀerent. For instance, when δthd
is small, the most similar trace may have only two or three samples. When
increasing δthd, a longer matched trace or subtrace may be found. Therefore, the
distance threshold δthd also aﬀects the prediction results obtained by the most
similar trace.

)

M
K

(
 
s
r
o
r
r
e

0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

0.06

0.05

0.04

b
σ

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

el

eb

el

eb

el

eb

tx = 60

tx = 120

tx = 180

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) The distribution of the prediction errors according to linear extrapolation
method el and Method C eb in the following 60 seconds, 120 seconds and 180 seconds.
The two boxplots on the left show the distribution of the one step location prediction
results, i.e., predicting the location 60 seconds into the future. The middle two plots
are the corresponding results given by predicting the location 120 seconds into the
future. The last two are the prediction results for 180 seconds into the future. (b) The
distributions of the standard deviation of the results given by Method C in predicting
the location at 60 seconds, 120 seconds and 180 seconds later.

Secondly, we evaluate our method for predicting location with time horizons of
120 seconds and 180 seconds. Note that the location prediction by using similar
traces is only suitable for the case to predict the location at a point in the
similar traces. This is because the longer the prediction time is, the less likely
to ﬁnd a location at roughly the same time in the similar traces. Therefore, the
comparison is only made between the linear extrapolation method and Method
C. The prediction results, which are given in terms of the distribution of errors
shown in Figure 2 (a). The mean errors for the consecutive steps are 0.099
km, 0.214 km, and 0.345 km for the linear extrapolation method, while the
corresponding result for the Brownian Bridge model are 0.084 km, 0.173 km,
0.281 km, respectively. In all these cases, the Brownian Bridge model shows
lower mean errors than the linear extrapolation, especially for predicting the
location in longer time horizons.

Moreover, Figure 2 (b) shows the distributions of the estimated standard
deviation of the predictions in Method C in the case of predicting the future
location at tx = 60, tx = 120, and tx = 180. A few observations can be made
from this ﬁgure. Firstly, in all the cases, the estimated standard deviation is very
small, which is less than 0.03 in the most cases. This is due to that the estimated

220

M. Lin and W.-J. Hsu

standard deviation is calculated according to each Brownian Bridge model given
by Eq. (5).

The mean standard deviation σm for the traces is 0.021 km and the error of
GPS measurement is σg = 0.01 km. Therefore, the maximum standard deviation
given by Eq. (5) is when αx = 1
2 , indicating inferring a location in between two
samples, which is roughly 0.082 when t(cid:3)
x = 60 in our case. However, a much
smaller standard deviation given in Figure 2 (b) indicates that the predictions
are mostly near either the starting location or the ending location in the similar
traces. This is because when constructing the Brownian Bridge model in the
similar traces, the predicted locations with low standard deviations are mostly
near either the starting point or the ending point (c.f. Eq. (5)). Secondly, the
estimated standard deviation does not increase signiﬁcantly when predicting
the location in longer time horizons, e.g., when tx =120 or 180. Recall that in
each prediction the time is always normalized according to the corresponding
initial index in both the current trace and a matched trace. The locations used
in constructing the Brownian Bridge model are always the two locations that
correspond to right before and right after the normalized time of prediction.

According to the comparisons based on the mean prediction errors and the
estimated standard deviations, combining the linear extrapolation method and
individual’s historical records is a suitable choice for location prediction.

5.3 Discussions

For the few location prediction methods discussed before, the Brownian Bridge
model fails to predict if there is no similar trace within a given distance threshold
to the current trace. Because the linear extrapolation method shows decent re-
sults while using only two location samples. A possible remedy to the Brownian
Bridge method is to apply the linear extrapolation in the case of failing to ﬁnd
a match in the records.

One useful method for location prediction is the Kalman ﬁlter. We do not
choose Kalman ﬁlter for the following reasons. Firstly, a Kalman ﬁlter needs to
be speciﬁcally designed for each trace since the mobility behaviors may change
greatly even for the same individual. Secondly, learning the parameters in each
trace needs suﬃcient number of sample points, implying that the method is
unable to make any prediction for traces with few records. In contrast, with our
Method C, since the matching can be based on a subsequence of the current
trace with a few existing samples, it will be able to predict the future location
even with a few records.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we have presented a new algorithm for location prediction by
making use of similar traces and individual’s current mobility information. The
similar traces with current target trace are found on the basis of the edit dis-
tance. In order to predict individual’s location at any given point of time, we use

Brownian Bridge Model for High Resolution Location Predictions

221

a Brownian Bridge to model the uncertainties about person’s movements in be-
tween any two locations. The ﬁnal prediction combine both the current mobility
behaviors described by the linear extrapolation method and also the estimated
results from the individual’s Brownian Bridge models from similar traces. Ex-
perimental results show that our location prediction method by using Brownian
Bridge model is better than that using only the historical records or the linear
extrapolation method.

There are a few issues unresolved in this study. For instance, we have shown
in some cases, the linear extrapolation method is better than using the histor-
ical records or vice versa. Therefore, how to choose the right method at each
predicting time is a relevant question for future research.

References

1. Gruteser, M., Grunwald, D.: Anonymous Usage of Location-Based Services
Through Spatial and Temporal Cloaking. In: MobiSys, pp. 31–42. ACM, New York
(2003)

2. Lin, M., Hsu, W.-J., Lee, Z.Q.: Predictability of Individuals’ Mobility with High-
Resolution Positioning Data. In: UbiComp, pp. 381–390. ACM, New York (2012)
3. Song, C., Qu, Z., Blumm, N., Barab´ai, A.L.: Limits of Predictability in Human

Mobility. Science 327, 1018–1021 (2010)

4. Kim, S.-W., Park, S., Chu, W.W.: An index-based approach for similarity search
supporting time warping in large sequence databases. In: ICDE, pp. 607–614. IEEE
Computer Society, Washington (2001)

5. Ashbrook, D., Starner, T.: Using GPS to Learn Signiﬁcant Locations and Predict
Movement across Multiple Users. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 7, 275–286 (2003)
6. Krumm, J., Horvitz, E.: Predestination: Inferring destinations from partial tra-
jectories. In: Dourish, P., Friday, A. (eds.) UbiComp 2006. LNCS, vol. 4206, pp.
243–260. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)

7. Giannotti, F., Nanni, M., Pinelli, F., Pedreschi, D.: Trajectory pattern mining. In:

KDD, pp. 330–339. ACM, New York (2007)

8. Ester, M., Kriegel, H., J¨org, S., Xu, X.: A density-based algorithm for discovering
clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In: KDD, pp. 226–231. AAAI (1996)
9. Han, J., Kamber, M.: Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann,

San Francisco (2006)

10. Chen, L., Lv, M., Chen, G.: A system for destination and future route prediction

based on trajectory mining. Pervasive Mobile Computing 6, 657–676 (2010)

11. Monreale, A., Pinelli, F., Trasarti, R., Giannotti, F.: WhereNext: A location pre-
dictor on trajectory pattern mining. In: KDD, pp. 637–646. ACM, New York (2009)
12. Shreve, S. E.: Stochastic Calculus for Finance II - Contunuous-Time Models.

Springer (2004)

13. The Inference of the Parameter of the Brownian Bridge Model,

https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/6694774/BB_varianceInference.pdf

14. Zheng, Y., Zhang, L., Xie, X., Ma, W.-Y.: Mining interesting locations and travel
sequences from GPS trajectories. In: WWW, pp. 791–800. ACM, New York (2009)
15. Zheng, Y., Li, Q., Chen, Y., Xie, X., Ma, W.-Y.: Understanding mobility based on

GPS data. In: Ubicomp, pp. 312–321. ACM, New York (2008)

16. Zaidi, Z.R., Mark, B.L.: Mobility Tracking Based on Autoregressive Models. IEEE

Transactions on Mobile Computing 10, 32–43 (2011)


