Co-occurring Cluster Mining for Damage

Patterns Analysis of a Fuel Cell

Daiki Inaba1, Ken-ichi Fukui2, Kazuhisa Sato3, Junichirou Mizusaki4, and

Masayuki Numao2

1Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,

Osaka University, Japan

2The Institute of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, Osaka University,

8-1 Mihogaoka, Ibaraki, Osaka, 567-0047, Japan

3Graduate School of Engineering, Tohoku University, Japan

4Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials,

Tohoku University, Japan

Abstract. In this study, we research the mechanical correlations among
components of solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) by analyzing the co-occurrence
of acoustic emission (AE) events which are caused by damage. Then we
propose a novel method for mining patterns from the numerical data such
as AE. The proposed method extracts patterns of two clusters consid-
ering co-occurrence between clusters and similarity within each cluster
at the same time. In addition, we utilize the dendrogram obtained from
hierarchical clustering for reduction of the search space. We applied the
proposed method to AE data, and the damage patterns which represent
the main mechanical correlations were extracted. We can acquire novel
knowledge about damage mechanism of SOFC from the results.

Keywords: clustering, co-occurrence pattern, damage evaluation

1 Introduction

The fuel cell is regarded as a highly eﬃcient, low-pollution power generation
system that produces electricity by direct chemical reaction. However, a cru-
cial issue in putting SOFCs into practical use is the establishment of a tech-
nique for evaluating the deterioration of SOFCs in the operating environment.
Since SOFCs operate in harsh environments (i.e., high temperature, oxidation
and reduction), the reaction area is decreased by fracture damage, and the cell
performance is reduced as a result[1]. Two of the co-authors have succeeded
in observing mechanical damage to SOFCs using the acoustic emission (AE)
method[2]. Acoustic emission is an elastic wave (i.e., vibration, sound waves, in-
cluding ultrasonic wave) produced by damage, such as cracks in the material, or
by friction between materials. Depending on the “fracture mode” (i.e., opening
or shear), the type of material, the fracture energy, the shear rate, and other
factors, distinct AE wave forms are produced[3, 4].

Because AE data is enormous and high dimensional, data mining techniques
have been applied for AE data in order to help SOFC experts discover the type

2

D. Inaba et al.

and cause of damage. Fukui et al. used kernel self-organizing map (kernel SOM)
to succeed in understanding the overview of damage process visually[5]. Also
Kitagawa et al. used KeyGraph and density estimation combining with kernel
SOM to identify the damage transition and rare essential events[6]. However,
little knowledge about the mechanical correlation of damages has been obtained.
Hence, this paper aims to extract damage patterns which represent major me-
chanical correlation among components in SOFC. For such purpose, this paper
proposes a novel method of co-occurrence pattern extraction against numerical
data such as AE events. The proposed method determines the area (or the com-
ponents) of two co-occurring clusters considering co-occurrence between clusters
and similarity within each clusters. The experiments show that we can acquire
novel knowledge about damage mechanism of SOFC from damage pattern, even
for the SOFC experts.

2 The proposed method: Co-occurring Cluster Mining

2.1 Problems of the conventional methods

The task to extract co-occurring AE events is equivalent in some part to the well
researched frequent pattern mining. Frequent pattern mining is to extract item
sets appering frequently. An item is mainly symbolic data, however, there are
also methods such as QLIQUE[8] and mining quantative frequent itemsets[9],
which can handle numeric item. In [8] and [9], frequent item sets are extracted
by searching frequent subspace clusters. However, the purpose is diﬀerent from
our work, because the above works do not search co-occurrence between clusters.
The straightforward approach to extract co-occurrence patterns from numer-
ical data is ﬁrst to execute clustering, and then to extract patterns. For example,
Honda and Konishi quantized by SOM the image data of clouds obtained from
the satellite, and then extracted association rules about the climate change[10].
Also, Yairi et al. extracted association rules about anomaly detection after clus-
tering from time series data transmitted by the satellite[11]. After clustering,
the correlation pattern extraction method among clusters are used in these re-
searches, namely, two steps pattern extraction method.

However, the above works do not consider the co-occurrence among clusters
during clustering process. As a result, clusters may contain data points which
are not related to the co-occurrence patterns. To the contrary, clusters may not
contain data points which are related to the co-occurrence patterns. For example,
in SOFC, a glass seal changes its state according to the temperature, and the
feature of caused AE events also changes gradually. We aim to extract a part
of AE events caused by the damage of the glass seal which co-occur with other
components of SOFC.

2.2 The requirements of a co-occurrence pattern

In this section, we deﬁne the characteristics of data this work handles, then
deﬁne the requirements of the co-occurrence pattern.

Co-occurring Cluster Mining for Damage Patterns Analysis of a Fuel Cell

3

Deﬁnition 1 (numerical event sequence). Suppose N numerical data xi =

(xi,1,¢¢¢ , xi,v), (i = 1,¢¢¢ , N) in v dimensional space are obtained in order
x1,¢¢¢ , xN .
Deﬁnition 2 (basket). Suppose an event sequence with numerical value is di-
vided into some sections in time series. Namely, let all data set D is denoted
by D = [x1,¢¢¢ , xi][xi+1,¢¢¢ , xj]¢¢¢ [xk,¢¢¢ , xN ], (i < j < k < N), where
“[¢]” refers to a basket.

The baskets are given by a minute, a day and so on, besides the length of baskets
is not always regular. The details about SOFC data is described in section 3.2.
Here, extracted co-occurrence patterns must satisfy the following three re-

quirements:
Requirement 1 (correlation). As for two sets composed of events A, B ‰ D,

the co-occurring ration of A and B must be high rate.

E.g., Jaccard coeﬃcient, conﬁdence as in association rule, etc.
Requirement 2 (frequency). The number of times of which A and B co-occurs

in the time series are over the certain number of times.

E.g., support, etc.
Requirement 3 (similarity). As for two event sets A and B, events in each

event set is similar each other.

E.g., variance in a cluster, average distance between data points in a cluster,

etc.

Requirements 1 and 2 are derived from the co-occurrence between event sets
(cluster), and requirement 3 is from the clustering of the events.
Deﬁnition 3 (co-occurring cluster). If event sets with numerical value A, B ‰
D satisfy the above three requirements, set A is a co-occurring cluster of B.
Deﬁnition 4 (co-occurrence pattern). With co-occurring clusters A and B which
satisfy all three requirements, P (A, B) = fA, BjA \ B = ;g is called a co-
occurrence pattern.

We aim to extract the co-occurrence petterns mentioned above. This paper pro-
poses a novel method of co-occurrence pattern extraction called Co-occurring
Cluster Mining. Note that we do not consider the order of occurrence of AE
events in the same basket. The reason is mentioned in section 3.2.

A conventional frequent pattern means an item set appearing frequently,
whereas co-occurrence pattern means two sets composed of events that co-occur
frequently. Therefore, the proposed method is regarded as a particular kind of
clustering method considered the co-occurrence between clusters, rather than
frequent pattern mining.

2.3 The objective function

In this section, the objective function is deﬁned to search co-occurrence pat-
terns. In searching, the most complex problem is to make clusters which satisfy

4

D. Inaba et al.

the correlation and similarity. We search the pairs of clusters A, B ‰ D which
maximize the following objective function:

L(A, B) = ff(A, B)gα ¢ fg(A, B)g(1¡α),

(1)

where the function f(A, B) denotes the pattern correlation. The higher f(A, B)
value is, the more correlative pattern. For example, Jaccard coeﬃcient and con-
ﬁdence as in association rule are used as f(A, B). Jaccard coeﬃcient is used in
case of analyzing the ratio of the co-occurrence of event A and B. While conﬁ-
dence is used to the co-occurrence of event B under the situation that event A
occurred. Note that because requirement 1 denotes the correlation among many
separated baskets, the correlation in the short and sequential period must be
excluded. Therefore, even if events A and B co-occur several times in the same
basket, this is considered only once.

On the other hand, the function g(A, B) denotes the pattern similarity. The
higher g(A, B) value is, the more similar clusters. For example, the distance
between clusters, or the variance within each cluster are used as g(A, B). Note
that some deﬁnitions of the distance between clusters does not guarantee the
monotonicity of cluster merge, e.g., centriod and median methods in hierarchical
clustering. Therefore, we should avoid using those distances for g(A, B). If only
the distance between objects can be calculated, the average distance between
objects is used as the variance in a cluster.

Since the co-occurrence patterns must satisfy the requirements of correlation
and similarity at the same time, the objective function is deﬁned as the product
of f(A, B) and g(A, B). Generally speaking, the range of f(A, B) is diﬀerent
from that of g(A, B). Therefore, by normalizing as f(A, B), g(A, B) 2 [0, 1],
both requirements of the correlation and similarity can be satisﬁed equally. The
parameter α 2 [0, 1] determines whether the correlation or similarity should be
considered strongly. If α is close to 1, the similarity is considered more strongly
than the correlation, and if α is close to 0, and vice versa. By maximizing the
objective function by eq. (1), the co-occurrence patterns are obtained which sat-
isﬁes the requirements of correlation and similarity. In addition, the requirement
of frequency can be satisﬁed by extracting patterns which have higher support
value than the pre-deﬁned minimum support.

2.4 The algorithm
The proposed method searches the pairs of clusters maximizing L(A, B). The
proposed method is based on an aggregative clustering, because of high com-
putational complexity when using partition clustering like k-means. Partition
clustering needs to be executed every time variables in the search are changed,
in order to generate the candidate clusters of A and B. On the contrary, in
aggregative clustering, once the merge process of clustering is obtained, co-
occurrence patterns can be searched on the merge process. However, even in
aggregative clustering, the pair of Seeds(starting point of clustering) is O(N 2),
and the expansion from each Seed will be O(N). Therefore, the total compu-
tational complexity is O(N 4). For the reduction of search space, we utilize a

‡

·

Co-occurring Cluster Mining for Damage Patterns Analysis of a Fuel Cell

5

dendrogram from the result of hierarchical clustering and search co-occurrence
patterns on the obtained dendrogram. By using the dendrogram, although the
degree of freedom about the decision of cluster shape decreases, the beneﬁt is a
great reduction of the search space to O((N log N)2).

The algorithm of the proposed method is presented below. Here, assume a

dendrogram by some hierarchical clustering has been obtained in advance.

¶

Co-ocuurring cluster mining algorithm

Input: Lmin(A, B), Suppmin(A, B), dendrogram by hierarchical clustering (HC),
baskets of numerical event sequence D = fObjectkgN
Output: Co-occurrence patterns fP (A, B)g(cid:637)

k=1.

FOR i from 1 to N DO

FOR j(6= i) from 1 to N DO
Cluster A ˆ Objecti, Cluster B ˆ Objectj ;
Initialize LBest(A, B) ˆ 0;

WHILE (TRUE) DO

IF L(A, B) > LBest(A, B) THEN

LBest(A, B) ˆ L(A, B);
Cluster ABest ˆCluster A, Cluster BBest ˆCluster B;

END IF
IF all pairs of clusters satisfying A \ B = ; have been searched THEN

BREAK;

END IF
Cluster A ˆ Expand Cluster(A, HC);
IF A \ B 6= ; THEN

Cluster A ˆ Objecti, Cluster B ˆ Expand Cluster(B, HC);

END IF

END WHILE
IF L(A, B)Best > Lmin(A, B) and Supp(A, B) > Suppmin(A, B) THEN

Output P (A, B) = fABest, BBestg;

1. BEGIN
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

END IF

END FOR

END FOR

24. END(cid:181)

Here, Fig. 1 represents an example of the process of Expand Cluster().
Expand Cluster() moves the current merge state from a certain node to the
upper parent node, all leaf nodes (objects) which are children of this node be-
long to new cluster A. By the expansion of cluster A, label A is given to objects
1 and 6. And A and B co-occur in baskets 1 and 3, namely, a co-occurrence
pattern (A, B) appears twice.

3 Application to AE data

3.1 Damage evaluation test of fuel cells

A schematic diagram of the apparatus used to perform the SOFC damage test
is shown in Fig. 2. The test section was initially heated up to 800–C in order to
melt a soda glass ring and was then gradually decreased to room temperature.
Note that this damage evaluation test was to rupture the cells intentionally
while lowering the temperature. Therefore, the knowledge obtained through this
experiment is not directly available to actual running the SOFC. However, it is
suﬃcient to demonstrate and conﬁrm the reasonableness of the proposed method.

6

D. Inaba et al.

Fig. 1. The process of the proposed method. The above shows the dendrogram in the
data space, and the below shows baskets in the time series.

The AE measurement was performed using a wide-band piezoelectric transducer.
The AE transducer was attached to an outer Al2O3 tube away from the heated
section. The sampling rate is 1 MHz, and so the observable maximum frequency
is 500 KHz. Running the SOFC for over 60 hours, 1,429 AE events were extracted
using the burst extraction method[12, 5].

Then, the same as the research by Fukui et al.[5], the AE events obtained
from damage evaluation test are transformed into frequency spectrum data by
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). We obtained 1,429 frequency spectrum data each
of which consists of 3,968 discrete points.

3.2 Division into basket

Assume that the potential stress in a composite material is released after a
large-energy AE event occurs, i.e., interactions of internal forces are reset. In
this research, the observed AE event sequence was divided into baskets followed
by the research of Kitagawa et al.[6], assuming a sequence until a large-energy
AE event occurs to be a chain of damage progression. These baskets are used in
the proposed method. Note that because the damage process of SOFC is a com-
plicated system, it is diﬃcult to extract co-occurrence patterns considering the
order of occurrence or the time intervals between AE events exactly. Therefore,
we do not consider the order of occurrence of AE events in the same basket, or
the time intervals between AE events.

In this research, the energy threshold is 1, 500mV2, which is also used in the
research[6]. Then the AE event sequence is divided into 123 baskets. Fig. 3 shows
an example of division into baskets.

Co-occurring Cluster Mining for Damage Patterns Analysis of a Fuel Cell

7

Fig. 2. SOFC damage test apparatus.

Fig. 3. An example of division into baskets (damage segments).

3.3 Calculation of distance between AE events

This work utilizes the result of the research by Fukui et al.[5] obtained by the
kernel SOM. We regard the objects used for hierarchical clustering as the code-
book vector (prototype). The self-organizing map[13] is an unsupervised neural
network and a visualization technique by mapping the high dimensional feature
space into the lower dimensional space (mainly two dimension). Kernel SOM[14]
is the extended method of conventional SOM by improving the ability to express
distribution of data with kernel method, which extends linear analysis method
to non-linear method by mapping higher dimension. According to the earlier re-
search, because the major damage types are already known on the kernel SOM,
we can visually understand damage types with this result. Furthermore, the
number of data points N is replaced to the number of prototypes M(N >> M)
by the quantization of the data space, the computational cost of searching co-
occurring patterns is signiﬁcantly reduced.

The distance between prototype vectors for the requirement of similarity
(requirement 3) can be culculated as follows. Let M neurons of the prototype
vectors be fm1,¢¢¢ , mMg, where mj = (mj,1,¢¢¢ , mj,v). In addition, let the

8

D. Inaba et al.

∑

position of M neurons in the topological layer be rj = (ξj, ηj) : j = 1,¢¢¢ , M.
The number of neurons and the layout of the topological layer must be pre-
deﬁned, and a regular or hexagonal grid is normally used. Also, let a function
φ : Ω ! H maps an original data space Ω to a high dimensional feature space
H. Then the prototype vector mi is calculated by:
hc(n),iφ(xn),

∑

mi = γi

(2)

n

where γi = 1/
n hc(n),i refers to the normalization factor. The neighborhood
function hi,j is the Gaussian function: hi,j = exp(¡kri ¡ rjk2/2σ2), where σ
refers to the radius which represents the inﬂuence range of neighborhood.
Although the mapping function φ(xn) cannot be calculated directly(cid:636)a kernel
function can be deﬁned as K(xi, xj) = hφ(xi), φ(xj)i, where h,i refers to the
scalar product.

In this research, we use Kullback-Leibler (KL) kernel which was validated

against the waveform data by Ishigaki et al.[15] and Fukui et al.[5].

Finally, the distance between prototype vectors mi and mj is culculated by:
di,j = kmi ¡ mjk2 = γ2

hc(k),ihc(l),iK(xk, xl)

i

∑

∑

¡2γiγj

k

l

hc(k),ihc(l),jK(xk, xl) + γ2
j

hc(k),jhc(l),jK(xk, xl).(3)

k

l

k

l

Since batch learning is used for kernel SOM, the neighborhood radius σ
gradually decreases as learning is iterated. In culculating the distance of the
codebook vector from the map obtained after the learning, we cannot decide the
⁄ used for
value of σ deﬁnitely. Therefore, the optimal neighborhood radius σ
extraction of co-occurrence patterns is supposed to maximize the variance of the
⁄ = arg maxσ V (di,j). σ
⁄ = 0.1 was
distances between the prototype vectors: σ
linearly searched at intervals of 0.01. We use this di,j as the distance between
individual events.

3.4 The design of the object function

∑

∑

∑

∑

This paper focuses on the co-occurrence relationship in certain damage period,
namely about two sets of AE events A and B, we aim to extract damages
co-occurring at the high probability. Therefore, we use Jaccard coeﬃcient as
f(A, B):

f(A, B) = count(A \ B)
count(A [ B) ,

(4)

where count(A) is the number of baskets where event A appears.

Moreover, we cannot obtain the centroid of clusters but can obtain the dis-
tance between codebook vectors with dave as the average distance among all
pairs of codebook vectors in the cluster. Hence, g(A, B) is:

√

g(A, B) = 1 ¡

daveAdaveB/d2

aveALL,

(5)

Co-occurring Cluster Mining for Damage Patterns Analysis of a Fuel Cell

9

Table 1. The average values of the objective function of the extracted 100 patterns
in diﬀerent hierarchical clustering methods; single linkage, complete linkage, group
average, centroid, median, and Ward’s method.

Method Single Complete Average Centroid Median Ward
Average 0.443
0.459 0.487

0.494

0.444

0.482

Table 2. The number of extracted damage patterns. The alphabets of damage types
are listed in Table 3, and the inter-regions damage types are represented with “,”.

Pattern Number Pattern Number
(B)-(B)
(B)-(C)
(B)-(D)
(B)-(E)
(C)-(C)

(D)-(D)
(D)-(E)
(E)-(E)
(E)-(F)

(E)-(A),(D)

1
1
4
5
3

2
3
2
2
1

Pattern

Number

(E)-(D),(E)
(F)-(A),(D)
(F)-(D),(E)

(A),(D)-(D),(E)
(D),(E)-(D),(E)

1
1
1
1
1

where dave is normalized divided by daveALL of the largest cluster so that
g(A, B) 2 [0, 1]. To consider the corrrelation and similarity of patterns as equally
as possible, the parameter α in eq. (1) is set to 0.5.

3.5 The results of extracted damage patterns

The topology of kernel SOM is two dimensional square grid, and the number of
neurons is 15 £ 15.

First, Table 1 shows the average values of the objective function in diﬀerent
hierarchical clustering methods. The values are averaged by the extracted 100
patterns when the minimum support is 0.04. The complete linkage method shows
the best result. The following all results are obtained by using the complete
linkage method in the hierarchical clustering.

Next, the representative extracted damage patterns are explained. Two ex-
perts of SOFC of the co-authors interpreted damage patterns. Table 2 shows
the estimated interpretation of extracted damage patterns. As the parameters
of pattern extraction, the minimum object function is 0.47, the minimum sup-
port is 0.04, 29 patterns were extracted. The computational time when using
1429 individual objects was 888.7 (sec) with Intel Xeon CPU 2.66GHz and 6GB
RAM. While, when using prototypes of the kernel SOM, the computational time
in 225 objects was 25.6 (sec).

In addition, Fig. 4 shows an example of the result of extracted damage pattern
on the result of kernel SOM. The correspondence of the regions on the map
to damage types is shown in Table 3. This damage types and frequent period
are already known by the research of Fukui et al.[5]. Each damage pattern is
distinguished by using diﬀerent colors, and the typical waveforms and spectra of
the damage type are shown.

10

D. Inaba et al.

Table 3. The major damage types corresponding to the map in Fig. 4.

Region

Damage type

(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)

squeaking of the members during heating

progression of the initial cracks

squeaking of the members followed by (B)

cracks in the electrolyte
cracks in the glass seal

cracks in and exfoliation of the electrode

Valid results based on the knowledge of SOFC experts: Damage

pattern 1 is a co-occurring pattern of (B) the progression of the initial cracks
and (D) cracks in the electrolyte. In pattern 1, AE events on the top of
map are a part of (B) of which these AE events occur in the latter period.
Therefore, damage pattern 1 is interpreted that the progression of the initial
cracks causes cracks in the electrolyte. According to table 2, we can know
that progression of the initial cracks co-occurs with various damages. So we
estimate that progression of the initial cracks is the starting points of various
damages.
Next, damage pattern 2 is the co-occurring patterns of the cracks in the glass
seal and cracks in and exfoliation of the electrode. Especially, the damage
type which inﬂuences cracks in and exfoliation of the electrode are cracks
in the glass seal which occurs in the latter period of cracks of the glass
seal. The glass seal changes its state by the temperature, and in the period
mentioned above, the temperature is decreasing and glass seal is congealed at
the temperature of damage pattern 2. The glass seal and the electrode are not
connected directly, but it is supposed that the shrinking and transformation
of the cell due to the congelation of the glass seal produces the indirect
mechanical eﬀect.

Novel results: According to Table 2, no damage patterns which include both
regions (D) and (F) are extracted. In spite of the fact that the electrolyte
and the electrode are connected, damage patterns which include them were
not extracted at all. This result was interesting to SOFC experts.
Next, since damage pattern 3 exists in the inter-regions, damage pattern 3
may contain novel damage types. Since these damages cause AE events con-
tain high peaks in the low frequency of the spectrum, the damages between
regions (A) and (D) are estimated as the exfoliation of the electrolyte, and
the damages between regions (D) and (E) are estimated as the exfoliation of
the electrolyte or the glass seal. Damages of pattern 3 have never discovered
from the earlier research based only on the occurrence frequency of each AE
event. Taking the co-occurrence relationship of AE events into consideration,
damage pattern 3 is discovered for the ﬁrst time.

Co-occurring Cluster Mining for Damage Patterns Analysis of a Fuel Cell

11

Fig. 4. An example of extracted damage patterns. The central map is the classiﬁcation
result by the kernel SOM.

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed the novel extraction method of co-occurrence patterns
against numerical data: Co-occurring Cluster Mining. The proposed method de-
termines the area (or the components) of two co-occurring clusters considering
co-occurrence between clusters and simultaneously similarity in each cluster. We
applied the proposed method for AE events obtained from damage evaluation
test of SOFC. As a result, damage patterns which demonstrate major mechanical
correlations of SOFC were extracted, including unexpected but valuable damage
patterns.

Furthermore, we will apply the proposed method for various numerical data
such as earthquake wave or the track of point on dynamic image, and demon-
strate the general-purpose of the proposed method.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by the Management Expenses Grants for Na-
tional Universities Corporations from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology of Japan (MEXT) and also KAKENHI (21700165).

12

D. Inaba et al.

References

1. Krishnamurthy, R.

to

oxygenpotential
gradientsinnon-stoichiometricoxides, Journal of Acta Materialia, Vol. 52, pp. 1807-
1822 (2004)

and Sheldon, B.W.: Stress due

2. Sato, K., Omura, H., Hashida, T., Yashiro, K., Kawada, T., Mizusaki, J., and
Yugami, H.: Tracking the onset of damage mechanism in ceria-based solid oxide
fuel cells under simulated operating conditions, Journal of Testing and Evaluation,
Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 246-250 (2006)

3. Rippengill, S., Worden, K., Holford, K.M. and Pullin, R.: Automatic classiﬁcation
of acoustic emission patterns, Journal for Experimental Mechanics: Strain, Vol. 39,
No. 1, pp. 31-41 (2003)

4. Godin, N., Huguet, S. and Gaertner, R.: Inﬂuence of hydrolytic ageing on the
acoustic emission signatures of damage mechanisms occurring during tensile tests
on a polyester composite: Application of a Kohonen’s map, Composite Structures,
Vol. 72, No. 1, pp. 79-85 (2006)

5. Fukui, K., Akasaki, S., Sato, K., Mizusaki, J., Moriyama, K., Kurihara, S. and
Numao, M.: Visualization of Damage Progress in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, Journal
of Environment and Engineering, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp.499-511 (2011)

6. Kitagawa, T., Fukui, K., Sato, K., Mizusaki, J. and Numao, M.: Extraction of
Essential Events with Application to Damage Evaluation on Fuel Cells, Smart
Innovation, Systems and Technologies, Springer, Vol. 8, pp. 89-108 (2011)

7. Agrawal, R. and Srikant, R.: Fast algorithms for mining association rules, Proc.
of 20th International Conference on Very Large Databases (ICVLD), pp. 487-499
(1994)

8. Agrawal, R., Gehrke, J., Gunopulos, D. and Raghavan, P.: Automatic subspace
clustering of high dimensional data for data mining applications, Proc. of the 1998
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (ICMD), pp.
94-105 (1998)

9. Mitsunaga, Y., Washio, T. and Motoda, H.: Mining Quantitative Frequent Itemsets
Using Adaptive Density-Based Subspace Clustering, Proc. of the 5th International
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 793-796 (2005)

10. Honda, R. and Konishi, O.: Temporal rule discovery for time-series satellite images
and integration with RDB, Proc. of the 5th European Conference on Principles of
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (PKDD), pp. 204-215 (2001)

11. Yairi, T., Ishihama, N., Kato, Y., Hori, K. and Nakasuka, S.: Anomaly Detec-
tion Method For Spacecrafts Based on Association Rule Mining, Journal of Space
Technology and Science, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 1-10 (2001)

12. Kleinberg, J.: Bursty and hierarchical structure in streams, Proc. the 8th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD’02), pp. 91-101 (2002)

13. Kohonen, T.: Self-organizing maps, Springer Verlag (1995)
14. Boulet, R., Jouve, B., Rossi, F. and Villa, N.: Batch Kernel SOM and Related
Laplacian Method for Social Network Analysis, Neurocomputing, Vol. 71, pp. 1257-
1273 (2008)

15. Ishigaki, T. and Higuchi, T.: Dynamic Spectrum Classiﬁcation by Kernel Clas-
siﬁers with Divergence-Based Kernels and its Applications to Acoustic Signals,
International Journal of Knowledge Engineering and Soft Data Paradigms, Vol. 1,
No. 2, pp. 173-192 (2009)


