Computational Models of Stress in Reading  
Using Physiological and Physical Sensor Data 

Nandita Sharma and Tom Gedeon 

Research School of Computer Science 

Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 

{Nandita.Sharma,Tom.Gedeon}@anu.edu.au 

Abstract. Stress is a major problem facing our world today and it is important 
to  develop  an  objective  understanding  of  how  average  individuals  respond  to 
stress in a typical activity like reading. The aim for this paper is to determine 
whether stress patterns can be recognized using individual-independent compu-
tational  models  from  sensor  based  stress  response  signals  induced  by  reading 
text with stressful content. The response signals were obtained by sensors that 
sourced  various  physiological  and  physical  signals,  from  which  hundreds  of 
features  were  derived.  The  paper  proposes  feature  selection  methods  to  deal 
with redundant and irrelevant features and improve the performance of classifi-
cations obtained from models based on artificial neural networks (ANNs) and 
support  vector  machines  (SVMs).  A  genetic  algorithm  (GA)  and  a  novel  me-
thod based on pseudo-independence of features are proposed as feature selec-
tion  methods  for  the  classifiers.  Classification  performances  for  the  proposed 
classifiers are compared. The performance of the individual-independent clas-
sifiers improved when the feature selection methods were used. The GA-SVM 
hybrid produced the best results with a stress recognition rate of 98%.  

Keywords: stress classification, artificial neural networks, genetic algorithms, 
support vector machines, physiological signals, physical signals, reading.  

1 

Introduction 

Stress is part of everyday life and it has been widely accepted that stress which leads 
to  less  favorable  states  (such  as  anxiety,  fear  or  anger)  is  a  growing  concern  for 
people and society. The term, stress, was coined by Hans Selye. He defined it as “the 
non-specific response of the body to any demand for change” [1]. Stress is the body’s 
reaction or response to the imbalance caused between demands and resources availa-
ble to a person. Stress is seen as a natural alarm, resistance and exhaustion [2] system 
for the body to prepare for a fight or flight response to protect the body from threats 
and  changes.  When  experienced  for  longer  periods of  time  without  being  managed, 
stress has been widely recognized as a major growing concern. It has the potential to 
cause chronic illnesses (e.g. cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and some forms of can-
cer) and increase economic costs in societies, especially in developed countries [3, 4]. 
Benefits  of  stress  research  range  from  improving  day-to-day  activities,  through  

J. Pei et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2013, Part I, LNAI 7818, pp. 111–122, 2013. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 

112 

N. Sharma and T. Gedeon 

increasing  work  productivity  to  benefitting  the  wider  society  -  motivating  interest, 
making it a beneficial area of research and posing technical challenges in Computer 
Science.  Various  computational  methods  have  been  used  to  objectively  define  and 
classify  stress  to  differentiate  conditions  causing  stress  from  other  conditions.  The 
methods developed have  used simplistic  models formed  from  techniques like Baye-
sian networks [5], decision trees [6] and support vector machines [7]. These models 
have been built from a relatively smaller set of stress features than the sets used in the 
models in this paper. 

The human body’s response  signals obtained  from  non-invasive  methods that re-
flect reactions of individuals and their bodies to stressful situations have been used to 
interpret stress levels. These measures have provided a basis for defining stress objec-
tively. Stress response signals used in this paper fall into two categories – physiologi-
cal  and  physical  signals.  Physiological  signals  include  the  galvanic  skin  response 
(GSR), electrocardiogram (ECG) and blood pressure (BP). Unlike these signals,  we 
define physical signals as signals where changes by the human body can be seen by 
humans without the need for equipment and tools that need to be attached to individu-
als to detect general fluctuations. However, sophisticated equipment and sensors us-
ing  vision  technologies  are  still  needed  to  obtain  physical  signals  at  sampling  rates 
sufficient  for  data  analysis  and  modeling  like  the  ones  used  in  this  paper.  Physical 
signals  include  eye  gaze  and  pupil  dilation  signals.  GSR,  ECG,  BP,  eye  gaze  and 
pupil  dilation  signals  have  been  used  to  detect  stress  in  literature  [5,  8,  9]  but  this 
combination  has  not  been  reported  in  literature  so  far.  We  use  this  combination  of 
sensor signals in this paper and refer to them as primary signals for stress. 

Hundreds of stress features can be derived from primary signals for stress to classi-
fy stress classes. However, this set of features may include redundant and irrelevant 
features which may outweigh the more effective features showing stress patterns. This 
could  cause  a  stress  classification  model  to  produce  lower  quality  classifications. 
Since this paper is dealing with sensor data, some features may suffer from corruption 
as well. In order to achieve a good classification model that is robust to such potential 
features that may reduce the performance of classifications, appropriate feature selec-
tion  methods  must  be  developed  and  adopted  by  classifiers.  A  feature  selection  
method  that  selects  features  in  order  to  reduce  redundancy  using  correlation  based 
analysis could be used [10]. In addition, a genetic algorithm (GA) could also be used 
to  select  subsets  of  features  for  optimizing  stress  classifications.  A  GA  is  a  global 
search algorithm and has been commonly used to solve optimization problems [11]. 
The search algorithm is based on the concept of natural evolution. It evolves a popula-
tion of candidate solutions using crossover, mutation and selection methods in search 
for a population of a better quality. GAs have been successfully used to select features 
derived from physiological signals [12, 13]. 

This paper describes the method for collecting and developing computational mod-
els for recognizing stress patterns in response signals observed from individuals while 
reading stressed and non-stressed labeled text validated by participants. It details an 
experiment  conducted  to  collect  sensor  and  participant-reported  data  where  experi-
ment participants read text with stressful and non-stressful content during which mul-
tiple  response  signals  were  recorded.  Several  approaches  for  stress  recognition  in 

 

Computational Models of Stress in Reading 

113 

reading are developed, compared and discussed including methods for selecting fea-
tures  from  hundreds  of  features  derived  from  the  response  signals.  The  paper  
concludes with a summary of the findings and suggests directions for future work. 

2 

Data Collection from Reading Experiment 

Thirty-five  undergraduate  students  were  recruited  as  experiment  participants.  The 
participant cohort was made up of 25 males and 10 females over the age of 18 years 
old.  Each  participant  had  to  understand  the  requirements  of  the  experiment  from  a 
written set of experiment instructions with the guidance of the experiment instructor 
before they provided their consent to take part in the experiment. Afterwards, physio-
logical stress sensors were attached to the participant and physical stress sensors were 
calibrated.  The  instructor  notified  the  participant  to  start  reading,  which  triggered  a 
sequence  of  text  paragraphs.  After  finishing  the  reading,  participants  had  to  do  an 
assessment based on the reading. An outline of the process of the experiment for an 
experiment participant is shown in Fig. 1. 

Each  participant  had  physiological  and  physical  measurements  taken  over  the  12 
minutes  reading  time  period.  During  the  reading  period,  a  participant  read  stressed 
and  non-stressed  types  of  text  validated  by  participants.  Stressed  text  had  stressful 
content in the direction towards distress, fear and tension. Each participant read three 
stressed and three non-stressed text. Each text had approximately 360 words and was 
displayed on a computer monitor for participants to read. For consistency, each text 
was  displayed  on  a  1050  x  1680  pixel  Dell  monitor,  displayed  for  60  seconds  and 
positioned at the same location of the computer screen for each participant. Each line 
of the paragraph had 70 characters including spaces. 

Results  from the experiment  survey validated the text classes. This is a common 
method used in literature to validate stress classes  for tasks [14]. Participants found 
the paragraphs that were labeled stressed stressful and text labeled non-stressed as not 
stressful with a statistical significance of p < 0.001 according to the Wilcoxon test. 

The physiological and physical sensor signals (which we refer to as primary stress 
signals)  captured  during  the  experiment  were  GSR,  ECG,  BP,  eye  gaze  and  pupil 
diameter signals. Biopac ECG100C, Biopac GSR100C and Finapres Finger Cuff sys-
tems were used to take ECG, GSR and blood pressure recordings at a sampling rate of 
1000 Hz. Eye gaze and pupil dilation signals  were obtained using Seeing Machines 
FaceLAB system with a pair of infrared cameras at 60 Hz. There were other signals 
that were derived from the primary stress signals to form other stress response signals. 
These  signals  included  the  heart  rate  variability  signal,  which  was  calculated  from 
consecutive ECG peaks and another popular signal used for stress detection [15, 16]. 

Features  were  derived  from  the  primary  stress  signals.  Statistics  (e.g.  mean  and 
standard  deviation)  were  calculated  for  the  signal  measurements  for  each  5  second 
interval during the stressed and non-stressed reading. Measures such as the number of 
peaks  for  periodic  signals,  the  distance  an  eye  covered,  the  number  of  forward  and 
backward  tracking  fixations,  and  the  proportion  of  the  time  the  eye  fixated  on  
 

114 

N. Sharma and T. Gedeon 

different regions of the computer screen over 5 second intervals were also obtained. 
The  statistic  and  measure  values  formed  the  stress  feature  set.  There  were  215  
features altogether. 
 

Study 

Experiment 
Requirements

Provide 
Consent

Attach 
Sensors

Read Text

Do Survey

Fig. 1. Process followed by participants during the reading experiment 

 

 

Fig. 2. Equipment setup for the reading experiment 

3 

Feature Selection 

Features  used  for  developing  models  for  classification  had  an  effect  on  the  perfor-
mance of classifiers. Selecting effective features by reducing redundant and irrelevant 
features have been known to improve the quality of pattern recognition [17] because it 
generalizes the patterns in the data better and helps develop a generalized model that 
captures necessary data patterns. In turn, this improves the quality for classifications. 
In this paper, a feature selection method based on correlation of features and a genetic 
algorithm (GA) approach were developed and used as feature selection methods for 
stress classification. 

 

Computational Models of Stress in Reading 

115 

The features derived from the stress primary signals may have had redundant data 
so a feature selection approach based on correlation coefficients for features was de-
veloped. Correlation analysis using correlation coefficients has been reported to detect 
some redundancies in data [10]. It also took into account the time-varying nature of 
features and enabled comparison of features on this basis. 

X and Y respectively, X(cid:3365) and Y(cid:3365) the means and σX and σY are the standard deviations 

A correlation coefficient is a measure for the strength of the linear relationship be-
tween features. Consider two features, X and Y, with xt and yt values at time-step t in 

for X and Y, then the correlation coefficient rXY is defined by 

(cid:1870)(cid:3025)(cid:3026)(cid:3404)∑
(cid:4666)(cid:3051)(cid:3295)(cid:2879)(cid:3025)(cid:3364)(cid:4667)(cid:4666)(cid:3052)(cid:3295)(cid:2879)(cid:3026)(cid:3364)(cid:4667)
(cid:3269)(cid:3295)(cid:3128)(cid:3116)(cid:4666)(cid:3021)(cid:2878)(cid:2869)(cid:4667)(cid:3097)(cid:3273)(cid:3097)(cid:3274)
|(cid:1870)(cid:3025)(cid:3026)|(cid:3409)1 

 

 

 

The values for rXY fulfill the following equation: 

(1) 

(2) 

If the value for rXY = 0, then features X and Y are independent otherwise the features 
are correlated. However, stress features may have noise originating from data collec-
tion and the human body so as a result. In addition, the definition for independence of 
features for stress classification may be too strict. This motivated the use of different 
degrees for feature independence. In order to distinguish from independence defined 
by the strict criteria, we coin the term pseudo-independence to mean independence at 
a  certain  degree.  Suppose  the  degree  of  independence  is  set  at  rXY ≤  0.1  and  rXY  is 
found to be 0.05, then features X and Y are pseudo-independent. On the other hand if 
rXY is found to be 0.25, then features X and Y are not pseudo-independent. 

The pseudo-independent based feature selection method, pseudo-independent fea-
ture selection algorithm (PISA), was used to select stress features that a classifier was 
provided to detect stress patterns. Given a set of features, each feature was compared 
with  each  of  the  other  features  to  determine  whether  they  were  not  pseudo-
independent features. Features and their not pseudo-independent features were found 
and  used  to  generate  a  set  of  pseudo-independent  features  for  classification.  The 
process by  which a set of pseudo-independent features were obtained was by PISA. 
PISA is defined in Fig. 3.  

Given a set of features and a set of features that are not pseudo-independent to each 
feature, PISA firstly finds features that are pseudo-independent to every other feature. 
Then  it  selects  one  feature  from  a  cluster  of  not  pseudo-independent  features.  The 
feature selected from a cluster is based on its not pseudo-independent features – the 
number of features and whether the features have been already selected. Features with 
a higher number of not pseudo-independent features have  a greater chance of being 
selected. This characteristic of PISA minimizes the impact of highly correlated noisy 
features on classification. 

116 

N. Sharma and T. Gedeon 

Algorithm:  Pseudo-Independent  Feature  Selection  Algorithm  (PISA).  Find  fea-
tures that are pseudo-independent to other features given a set of features and their 
pseudo-independent features 
 
Inputs: 
•  A set of features, feature_set 
•  Collection of  features that are correlated to some degree to the  other features in 
feature_set  with  a  mapping  to  the  features  that  they  are  not pseudo-independent 
with in feature_set, corr_feat_mapping 

Output: 
•  Collection of pseudo-independent features 

Method: 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 
5. 

notcorr_feat_collection  get features that are in feature_set and not in 
corr_feat_mapping 
for each feature feat selected in descending order of the number of features 
that they are correlated with in corr_feat_mapping { 

corr_feats   get the features correlated with feat from 
corr_feat_mapping 
if none of the features in corr_feats  are in notcorr_feat_collection { 

then add feat in notcorr_feat_collection }} 

Fig.  3.  An  algorithm  to  generate  a  set  of  pseudo-independent  features  (PISA)  for  stress  
classification 

To illustrate PISA, consider an example input set comprising features and the fea-
tures that are not pseudo-independent to the features presented in Fig. 4. Firstly, PISA 
determines features that do not have any not pseudo-independent features. A set {f4} 
is the result at this point. Now, the rest of the pseudo-independent features need to be 
appended to the set. There are multiple possibilities and they are {f1, f3, f4} and {f2, 
f4}. After applying the algorithm the result will be {f2, f4}, which is the smaller fea-
ture set of the multiple feature sets with pseudo-independent features. This approach 
reduces the risk of selecting features that were derived from corrupted sensor data and 
negatively affect the performance for stress classification. Suppose the feature set {f1, 
f2, f3} were derived from corrupted sensor data and if {f1, f3, f4} was selected as a 
set  of  features  for  classification,  then  intuitively  the  possibility  of  a  classification 
model  to  capture  better  stress  patterns  would  be  lower  than  if  {f2,  f4}  was  chosen 
instead. 

 

Computational Models of Stress in Reading 

117 

 
Inputs: 
feature_set: {f1, f2, f3, f4} 
corr_feat_mapping: 

Feature 

 

Feature(s) not pseudo-independent to associated feature 

f1 
f2 
f3 

 
 
 

{f2} 
{f1, f3} 
{f2} 

 
Output: {f2, f4} 

 

Fig.  4.  An  example  to  illustrate  the  inputs  and  corresponding  output  for  the  PI  algorithm  
presented in Fig. 3 using a simple set of features 

Another  feature  selection  method  used  for  stress  classification  in  reading  was 
based on a GA. A GA is a global search algorithm that was used to select features to 
improve the quality of stress classifications. The GA search evolved a population of 
subsets  of  features  using  crossover,  mutation  and  selection  methods  in  search  for  a 
population of subset of features that produced a better quality stress classification. A 
subset of features is referred to as an individual or chromosome. The quality for each 
chromosome in the population was defined by the quality of classifications produced 
when a classifier was provided with the features in the chromosome. 

The initial population for the GAs was set up to have all the features. The number 
of  features  in  the  chromosomes  varied  but  the  chromosome  length  was  fixed.  The 
length of a chromosome was equal to the number of features in the feature space. A 
chromosome was a binary string where the index for a bit represented a feature and 
the bit value indicated whether the feature was used in the classification. 

The parameters for the GAs implemented were set as provided in Table 1. 

Table 1. Parameter settings for GAs used for feature selection 

GA Parameter 
population size 
number of generations 
crossover rate 
mutation rate 
crossover type 
mutation type  
selection type 

Value/Setting 
100 
2000 
0.8 
0.01 
MATLAB’s Scattered Crossover 
MATLAB’s Uniform Mutation 
MATLAB’s Stochastic Uniform Selection 

4 

Computational Stress Classifiers 

Classification  models  developed  for  stress  pattern  recognition  from  primary  stress 
signals  were based on an artificial  neural  network (ANN)  and a support vector  ma-
chine  (SVM).  The  models  were  extended  to  incorporate  feature  selection  phases  

118 

N. Sharma and T. Gedeon 

either  using  the  PISA  or  GA  approaches.  Each  classification  model  was  defined  to 
capture  individual-independent  stress  patterns.  The  accuracy  and  F-Score  were  
calculated for each approach to determine the quality of the classification. 

The stress reading data set was divided up into 3 subsets – training, validation and 
test sets – where 50% of the data samples were used for training a classification mod-
el  and  the  rest  of  the  data  set  was  divided  up  equally  for  validating  and  testing  the 
model. MATLAB was used to implement and test the models. 

4.1  Artificial Neural Network Based Stress Classifiers 

ANNs, inspired by biological neural networks, have capabilities for learning patterns 
to recognize characteristics in input tuples by classes. An ANN is made up of inter-
connected processors, known as artificial neurons, which are connected by weighted 
links  that  pass  signals  between  neurons.  In  this  paper,  feed-forward  ANNs  trained 
using  backpropagation  were  used.  Three  topologies  were  used  to  classify  stress  in 
reading. Each of the ANNs was provided stress features as inputs based on a selection 
method. Therefore, the ANNs differed only on the number of inputs. The ANN based 
stress classification models were: 
•  ANN: an artificial neural network classification model that was provided with all 

the features in the stress feature set as input to recognize stress patterns 

•  PISA+ANN: ANN with inputs as features produced by PISA 
•  GA+ANN: ANN with inputs as features produced by a GA 

The  MATLAB  adapt  function  was  used  for  training  the  ANNs  on  an  incremental 
basis.  Each  network  was  trained  for  1000  epochs  using  the  Levenberg-Marquardt 
algorithm.  The  network  had  7  hidden  neurons  and  one  neuron  in  the  output  layer. 
Future work could investigate optimizing the topology of the ANN for stress classifi-
cation on the reading data set. 

4.2 

Support Vector Machine Based Stress Classifiers 

SVMs have been widely used in literature for classification problems including classi-
fications based on physiological data [18]. Provided a set of training samples, a SVM 
transforms the data samples using a nonlinear mapping to a higher dimension with the 
aim to determine a hyperplane that partitions data by class or labels. A hyperplane is 
chosen based on  support  vectors,  which are  training data samples that define  maxi-
mum  margins  from  the  support  vectors  to  the  hyperplane  to  form  the  best  decision 
boundary. This contributes to the resistance to data overfitting and helps to generalize 
classifications well. 

Despite the useful characteristics, SVMs are still not robust to feature sets with re-
dundant and irrelevant features. As a consequence, hybrids of SVM with PISA or GA 
were  used  to  deal  with  ineffective  features  to  investigate  whether  the  hybrids  with 
feature selection methods improved the quality of the classification. 

 

 

Computational Models of Stress in Reading 

119 

The SVM based stress classification models developed were: 

•  SVM: a support vector machine classification model that was provided with all the 

features in the stress feature set as input similar to the ANN 

•  PISA+SVM: SVM with inputs as features produced by PISA 
•  GA+SVM: SVM with inputs as features produced by a GA 

5 

Results and Discussion 

The six ANN and SVM based techniques were implemented and tested on the reading 
data  set  for  stress  recognition.  Classification  results  were  obtained  using  10-fold 
cross-validation. The results are presented in Table 2. Classifiers with feature selec-
tion  methods  performed  better  than  classifiers  that  used  all  stress  features  to  model 
stress patterns. The hybrid classifiers had stress recognition rates and F-score values 
that were at least 8% and 12% better respectively. Classifiers with a GA as the feature 
selection method produced the highest stress recognition rates with GA+SVM as the 
best performing technique.  

Performance measures for the classification techniques show that it was beneficial 
to  use  the  feature  selection  methods  to  model  stress  patterns  in  reading.  The  stress 
features  would have  had redundant  features and PISA  would have reduced it. PISA 
compared every feature to every other feature in a pair-wise fashion and took a greedy 
approach in selecting features. Unlike PISA, the  GA took  a global  view of the  fea-
tures  and  would  have  managed  to  reduce  more  redundant,  irrelevant  and  corrupted 
features. 

In terms of execution time, the GA based approaches, GA+ANN and GA+SVM, 
took  longer  times  than  the  other  techniques  to  produce  solutions.  It  took  PISA  less 
than one second to select the features for the classification models whereas the execu-
tion  times  for  the  GA  based  approaches  were  in  the  order  of  hours.  Classification 
without a feature selection method or with PISA took relatively a similar amount of 
time. Empirical execution times for the different approaches are shown in Table 3. 

The  execution  times  for  GA  based  approaches  were  recorded  after  the  search 
reached  convergence  except  for  GA+ANN,  which  took  a  lot  longer  to  execute. 
GA+ANN took at least 3 days and it took the other techniques not more than a few 
hours to produce a solution. Therefore, it was not practical to let the GA+ANN search 
execute for longer. Table 2 and Table 3 have a * with the values to show results at the 
point when the GA+ANN search was terminated.  

Table 2. Performance measures for stress recognition using the different approaches based on 
10-fold cross-validation 

Classification 
Performance 
Measure 
Accuracy 
F-score 

 

ANN  PISA+ANN  GA+ANN 

SVM  PISA+SVM  GA+SVM 

0.68 
0.67 

0.76 
0.79 

0.82* 
0.82* 

0.67 
0.67 

0.80 
0.79 

0.98 
0.98 

120 

N. Sharma and T. Gedeon 

Table 3. Relative execution times for the different classification techniques 

ANN  PISA+ANN  GA+ANN 

SVM  PISA+SVM  GA+SVM 

5.1 

5.1 

4582* 

0.5 

0.5 

275 

 
Execution time 
(minutes) 

 

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 5. Performances for stress recognition using different degrees of pseudo-independence and 
PISA  as  the  feature  selection  method  for  the  classification  (a)  ANN  based  classification  (b) 
SVM based classification 

 
 

 

Computational Models of Stress in Reading 

121 

Due to the relative long execution times for the GA based approaches to search for 
a better stress classification result, other feature selection approaches can be investi-
gated  in  the  future.  With  shorter  execution  times  and  classification  performance  re-
sults for classifiers using PISA, PISA has the potential to increase the performance for 
classifications.  In  future,  PISA  based  classifiers  could  be  extended  to  have  a  more 
complex definition for pseudo-independence. 

ANN and SVM classification results using PISA over a range of degrees of pseu-
do-independence were also obtained to determine the effect of the different degrees of 
pseudo-independence on the classification results. The results are displayed in graphs 
shown in Fig. 5. The graphs show the stress recognition rates and F-score along with 
the  number  of  features  for  the  different  degrees  of  pseudo-independence.  For  both, 
ANN and SVM, the plot for the classification results show a positive overall rate of 
change  and  then  it  becomes  negative  after  0.5  degree  of  pseudo-independence.  The 
best  classification  results  are  produced  when  the  degree  of  pseudo-independence  is 
0.5. At this degree, every feature is pseudo-independent at the degree of 0.5 to every 
other  feature  in  the  set  of  features  used  as  input  to  develop  the  ANN  and  SVM  
classification models.  

6 

Conclusion and Future Work 

Classification  models  were  developed  to  recognize  individual-independent  stress 
patterns in physiological and physical data for reading. The use of a feature selection 
method that dealt with redundant features improved the quality of the classification. 
However, classification models based on a genetic algorithm provided better recogni-
tion  rates  for  stress  than  a  correlation  based  feature  selection  method.  On  the  other 
hand, genetic algorithm based approaches required much longer execution times but 
the correlation based feature selection method hardly had any impact on the execution 
time. In  future,  the correlation based  feature selection  method could be extended to 
have a wider definition for feature independence. Further, a hybrid of the two feature 
selection methods presented in this work could be developed to reduce the execution 
time  for  the  genetic  algorithm  based  search.  Moreover  in  this  work,  features  were 
selected  from  an  individual-independent  viewpoint.  Future  work  could  investigate 
feature  selection  based  on  relationships  of  features  for  each  individual  and  analyze 
their effect of the approach on classifications. 

References 

[1]  Selye, H.: The stress syndrome. The American Journal of Nursing 65, 97–99 (1965) 
[2]  Hoffman-Goetz,  L.,  Pedersen,  B.K.:  Exercise  and  the  immune  system:  a  model  of  the 

stress response? Immunology Today 15, 382–387 (1994) 

[3]  The-American-Institute-of-Stress.  America’s  No.  1  Health  Problem  -  Why  is  there  more 

stress today? (August 05, 2010), http://www.stress.org/americas.htm 

[4]  Lifeline-Australia, 

Stress  Costs 
http://www.lifeline.org.au 

Taxpayer 

$300K 

Every  Day 

(2009), 

122 

N. Sharma and T. Gedeon 

[5]  Liao, W., Zhang, W., Zhu, Z., Ji, Q.: A real-time human stress  monitoring system using 
dynamic  bayesian  network.  In:  Computer  Vision  and  Pattern  Recognition  -  Workshops, 
CVPR Workshops (2005) 

[6]  Zhai, J., Barreto, A.: Stress recognition using non-invasive technology. In: Proceedings of 
the  19th  International  Florida  Artificial  Intelligence  Research  Society  Conference, 
FLAIRS, pp. 395–400 (2006) 

[7]  Dou, Q.: An SVM ranking approach to stress assignment. University of Alberta (2009) 
[8]  Labbé, E., Schmidt, N., Babin, J., Pharr, M.: Coping with stress: the effectiveness of dif-

ferent types of music. Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback 32, 163–168 (2007) 

[9]  Healey, J.A., Picard, R.W.: Detecting stress during real-world driving tasks using physio-
logical  sensors.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Intelligent  Transportation  Systems 6,  156–166 
(2005) 

[10] Yu, L., Liu, H.: Feature selection for high-dimensional data: A fast correlation-based filter 

solution. In: 12th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 856–863 (2003) 

[11] Goldberg, D.E.: Genetic algorithms in search, optimization, and machine learning. Addi-

son-wesley (1989) 

[12] Park,  B.J.,  Jang,  E.H.,  Kim,  S.H.,  Huh,  C.,  Sohn,  J.H.:  Feature  selection  on  
multi-physiological signals for emotion recognition. In: 2011 International Conference on 
Engineering and Industries (ICEI), Korea, pp. 1–6 (2011) 

[13] Niu, X., Chen, L., Chen, Q.: Research on genetic algorithm based on emotion recognition 
using physiological signals. In: 2011 International Conference on Computational Problem-
Solving (ICCP), pp. 614–618 (2011) 

[14] Hill,  J.D.,  Boyle,  L.N.:  Driver  stress  as  influenced  by  driving  maneuvers  and  roadway 
conditions.  Transportation  Research  Part  F:  Traffic  Psychology  and  Behaviour 10,  
177–186 (2007) 

[15] Ferreira, P., Sanches, P., Höök, K., Jaensson, T.: License to chill!: how to empower users 
to cope with stress. In: Proceedings of the 5th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer In-
teraction: Building Bridges, pp. 123–132 (2008) 

[16] Dishman, R.K., Nakamura, Y.,  Garcia, M.E., Thompson, R.W., Dunn, A.L., Blair, S.N.: 
Heart  rate  variability,  trait  anxiety,  and  perceived  stress  among  physically  fit  men  and 
women. International Journal of Psychophysiology 37, 121–133 (2000) 

[17] Siedlecki, W., Sklansky, J.: A note on genetic algorithms for large-scale feature selection. 

Pattern Recognition Letters 10, 335–347 (1989) 

[18] Cheng, B.: Emotion recognition from physiological signals using support vector machine. 
In: Wu, Y. (ed.) Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering. AISC, vol. 114, pp. 
49–52. Springer, Heidelberg (2012) 

 


