Crime Forecasting Using Spatio-temporal

Pattern with Ensemble Learning

Chung-Hsien Yu1, Wei Ding1, Ping Chen1, and Melissa Morabito2

1 University of Massachusetts Boston,

100 Morrissey Blvd., Boston, MA 02125, USA
{csyu,ding}@cs.umb.edu, Ping.Chen@umb.edu

2 University of Massachusetts Lowell,

One University Avenue, Lowell, MA 01854, USA

Melissa Morabito@uml.edu

Abstract. Crime forecasting is notoriously diﬃcult. A crime incident is
a multi-dimensional complex phenomenon that is closely associated with
temporal, spatial, societal, and ecological factors. In an attempt to utilize
all these factors in crime pattern formulation, we propose a new feature
construction and feature selection framework for crime forecasting. A
new concept of multi-dimensional feature denoted as spatio-temporal
pattern, is constructed from local crime cluster distributions in diﬀerent
time periods at diﬀerent granularity levels. We design and develop the
Cluster-Conﬁdence-Rate-Boosting (CCRBoost) algorithm to eﬃciently
select relevant local spatio-temporal patterns to construct a global crime
pattern from a training set. This global crime pattern is then used for
future crime prediction. Using data from January 2006 to December 2009
from a police department in a northeastern city in the US, we evaluate
the proposed framework on residential burglary prediction. The results
show that the proposed CCRBoost algorithm has achieved about 80%
on accuracy in predicting residential burglary using the grid cell of 800-
meter by 800-meter in size as one single location.

Keywords: Spatio-temporal Pattern, Crime Forecasting, Ensemble Learn-
ing, Boosting.

1

Introduction

Crime forecasting is notoriously diﬃcult. A crime incident is a multi-dimensional
complex phenomenon that is closely associated with temporal, spatial, societal,
and ecological factors. In an attempt to utilize all these factors in crime pattern
formulation, we propose a new feature construction and feature selection frame-
work for crime forecasting. A new concept of multi-dimensional feature denoted
as spatio-temporal pattern, is constructed from local crime cluster distributions
in diﬀerent time periods at diﬀerent granularity levels.

Crime distributions are of diﬀerent sizes and shapes with respect to spatial
space over time. We use clustering to ﬁnd local crime distributions in diﬀer-
ent time periods. The spatial-temporal patterns then are induced from each

V.S. Tseng et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2014, Part II, LNAI 8444, pp. 174–185, 2014.
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014

Crime Forecasting Using Spatio-temporal Pattern

175

crime distribution through classiﬁcation. Each spatio-temporal pattern uses re-
lated crime incidences as indicators to represent a local crime pattern at certain
clustered locations during a certain time period. However, these locally learned
patterns could be redundant or overlapping at global level.

We design and develop the Cluster-Conﬁdence-Rate-Boosting (CCRBoost)
algorithm to eﬃciently select relevant local spatio-temporal patterns to construct
a global crime pattern from a training set. The main idea of this approach is
to iteratively pick a set of local patterns which give the least classiﬁcation error
at each boosting round. Each set of local patterns is referred as an ensemble
spatio-temporal pattern and is assigned a score (Called conﬁdence-rate in our
approach). At the end of boosting, a global pattern is constructed from these
ensemble patterns. This global pattern is capable of predicting crime by scaling
the total score of an input, a collection of crime indicators, evaluated on each
crafted ensemble patterns. The proposed algorithm is depicted in Figure 1.

tim
e

Crime indicators: f1,f2,…,fn

x={f1,f2,…,fn,y}

Clustering

tim
e

e
d
u
t
i
t
a

l

longitude

Spatio-Temporal Pattern 

Feature Construction

Local Patterns

….

….

Ensemble Pattern

Feature Selection

Ensemble Learning

Boosting

B

o

o

s

t

i

n

g

Confidence -Rate: CR1CR1

CR2CR2

T

CR3CR3

CR4CR4

….

Global Spatio-Temporal Pattern

Crime Forecasting

xh

(

)

hotspot

if

coldspot

C
Rx

|1

R

t

t
otherwise

t

Fig. 1. The ﬂowchart of the proposed CCRBoost algorithm (Better viewed in color)

In our real-world case study, we collaborated with the police department of a
northeastern city in the US to collect 4-year historical crime data, from January
2006 to December 2009. These data are used to evaluate the proposed framework
on residential burglary prediction. This city is 90 square miles in size and more
than 600 thousands in population. The results show that the proposed CCRBoost
algorithm has achieved about 80% on accuracy in predicting residential burglary
using the grid cell of 800-meter by 800-meter in size as one single location.

This rest of the paper is organized as the followings. The related work is de-
scribed and compared with our algorithm in Section 2. Our proposed CCRBoost

176

C.-H. Yu et al.

algorithm is thoroughly discussed in Section 3, including its theoretical analysis.
The setting and results of our experiments are presented in Section 4. We then
conclude our study in Section 5.

2 Related Work

Crime forecasting techniques from feature construction and feature selection
point of view, can be categorized into statistic mapping, mathematical modeling,
and clustering.

Statistic mapping uses historical statistics of the crime occurred at the same
location for forecast[1]. It focuses on seasonality of the crime with the assumption
that same type of crime recurs regularly with respect to time, while our approach,
in addition to time dimension, also factors in spatial neighborhood and other
relevant societal and ecological factors.

In [11], mathematical modeling is used to simulate the formatting of the crime
hotspots based on the crime frequency obtained from statistical model of indi-
vidual criminals. These hotspots are density based and overlapped with each
other. Therefore, a suppression process is needed to ﬁlter out the true hotspots.
Later in [8], Mohler proposed a point-based model that eliminates the suppres-
sion step. Using the concept in predicting aftershock, this model simulates how
the crime spreads out, like diseases, from the initial background events. The
hotspots deﬁned in this model are those locations covering most spread points.
The approach suits better for capturing the crime patterns with short life cycles
at local level while our algorithm is able to capture the long term cycles at global
level using our ensemble patterns. Another caveat of this model ﬁtting approach
is that the results can be way oﬀ when the incorrect initial points are given. In
our framework, the built-in feature selection process can discard irrelevant or
misrepresenting patterns when learning the global ensemble pattern.

The clustering approach adapted by Kumar is to deﬁne the geographic bound-
aries of each spatial clusters [7]. With these boundaries, the changing of crime
densities in a ﬁxed size cluster is considered as the crime trend of this particu-
lar cluster. Our global ensemble spatio-temporal pattern is designed to forecast
crime for the whole study area.

3 Crime Forecasting Using Spatio-temporal Patterns

3.1 The Concept of Spatio-temporal Patterns

Our approach is designed to enhance the utility of the near repeat hypothesis
formulated in Social Science [12]. This hypothesis suggests that the same type
of crime possibly recurs not only at the same neighboring locations but also at
a regular interval of time. In addition, crime incidents are closely related with
social behaviors and environmental conditions[6]. This implies that crime tends
to have similar trends at locations with similar societal and ecological structures.
We hypothesize that crime can be foreseen by investigating the trends of its

Crime Forecasting Using Spatio-temporal Pattern

177

correlated crime incidences. All of these three dimensions (location, time, and
correlated incidences) are taking into account when we deﬁne a spatio-temporal
pattern. A spatio-temporal pattern is a local pattern that represents the crime
pattern at certain locations during certain time period using correlated crime
incidences as the indicators. These indicators are used to represent societal and
ecological factors of diﬀerent locations.

The challenges are that how many local patterns there are during certain
time period and at which locations are unknown. Additionally, crime is not
evenly distributed throughout a city and there are areas that are more attractive
than others to criminals[3]. In order to ﬁnd the possible local patterns, we use
the unsupervised clustering approach without involving geographical features to
group those locations with similar indicators in the same time period. This group
of locations is considered as the spatial distribution of a possible crime pattern.
By varying the conﬁguration of the clustering method, the clusters with diﬀerent
sizes during diﬀerent periods of time can be generated. A classiﬁer is then trained
from each cluster and will be used to represent a local crime pattern.

Our next task is to use the spatio-temporal patterns as features to construct a
global level spatio-temporal pattern. This global crime pattern should be capable
of detecting crime incidences at every location. Which of these patterns should be
selected to form the global crime pattern? Those locally learned spatio-temporal
patterns could be redundant or overlapping. And, how can this global pattern
be constructed? To resolve these two issues at the same time, we propose a
conﬁdence-rate boosting approach. We will ﬁrst formulate the problem and then
discuss our boosting algorithm in detail.

3.2 Problem Formulation

We denote one crime indicator, a type of relevant crime event, as fp. Diﬀerent
indicators of the same location in the same period of time are used to form
a vector, denoted as x = [f1, f2, . . . , fP ], where P is the number of correlated
incidence types. Each vector x has one class label y which tells whether this
location is a hotspot. Through the clustering process, the vectors with similar
indicators are grouped into one cluster, denoted as c. A local spatio-temporal
pattern, denoted as r, is deﬁned as: r = q(c). q(), in our case, is a classiﬁer
induced from the cluster c and used to extract the crime pattern. This pattern
r is used to identify whether a vector is a hotspot. We denote x ∈ r if x is
recognized as hotspot by pattern r. Otherwise, x (cid:3)∈ r.

In reality, a crime pattern might not be represented as one single local pat-
tern because this pattern might shift location-wise or change size over time[9].
In order to truly capture the dynamics of crime patterns, we introduce the en-
semble spatio-temporal pattern, denoted as R = [r1 ∧ r2 ∧ . . . ∧ ri], which is the
conjunction of selected spatio-temporal patterns. Thus, if x ∈ R, then it must
be true that x ∈ r1 and x ∈ r2 and . . . and x ∈ ri. This ensemble pattern is

served as the base learner in our conﬁdence-rate boosting approach.

178

C.-H. Yu et al.

3.3 Conﬁdence-Rate Boosting

2H and 1

Before boosting, we balance the training data by setting the weight of hotspots
2C for coldspots, H and C are the numbers of hotspots and coldspots,
as 1
respectively. Each vector xi in the training data is denoted as D(i). The main
idea of our conﬁdence-rate boosting approach is to repeatedly pick the best
hypothesis ht which yields the least error rate at each boosting round t. In our
case, ht is an ensemble spatio-temporal pattern Rt built at round t. The error
function is deﬁned as:

Ei∼Dt [yiht(xi)] =

Dt(i)yiht(xi),

(1)

where Dt is the weight distribution at boosting round t. The theoretical back-
ground of the conﬁdence-rate boosting approach is analyzed as follows.

(cid:3)

i Dt(i)yiht(xi) ≤ (cid:4)

t Zt

Based on the study in [10], it has been proved that

so the upper bound of the error rate is

t Zt. Zt is deﬁned as:

Zt =

Dt(i)exp(−αtyiht(xi))

(2)

(cid:2)

i

(cid:4)

(cid:2)

i

(cid:2)

i

Thus, a smaller Zt that has a lower error upper bound will lead to a smaller
training error at each boosting round. Now, we let CR = αtht(xi) and ignore
the boosting round t. Then, we deﬁne our loss function as:

Z =

D(i)exp(−CRyi)

(3)

and we want to ﬁnd the minimum value of Z to lower the training error as much
as possible. CR is the conﬁdence-rate for pattern R and CR = 0 if xi /∈ R. Here,
xi ∈ R means that xi is recognized by pattern R as a hotspot and then set
yi = 1. Otherwise, set yi = −1. Since CR = 0 where xi /∈ R, we obtain

Z =

D(i) +

(cid:2)

i|xi /∈R

(cid:2)

i|xi∈R

D(i)exp(−CRyi)

Equation (4) can be rewritten as:

Z = W0 + W+exp(−CR) + W−exp(CR),

(cid:3)

where W0 =

i|xi /∈R D(i) so W0 is the total weights of predicted coldspots. And,

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

W+ =

D(i), W− =

i|xi∈R and y=1

i|xi∈R and y=−1

D(i),

(6)

W+ is the total weights of true hotspots (true positives), and W− is the total
weights of false hotspots (false positives). By taking the ﬁrst derivative of Z with
respect to CR and let dZ
dCR = 0, we can ﬁnd the value of CR when Z has the
maximum or minimum value:

(4)

(5)

Crime Forecasting Using Spatio-temporal Pattern

179

dZ

dCR = −W+exp(−CR) + W−exp(CR) = 0
=⇒ W−exp(CR) = W+exp(−CR)
=⇒ ln(W−exp(CR)) = ln(W+exp(−CR))
=⇒ ln(W−) + CR = ln(W+) − CR
=⇒ 2CR = ln(W+) − ln(W−)
=⇒ CR = 1
W+exp(−CR) + W−exp(CR) > 0. Since the second derivative of Z is greater
W+
than zero, Z has the minimum value of W0 + 2
W− ).

W+W− when CR = 1
To prevent the situation of W− = 0, we adjust the above equation as:

W+
W− ) And then, we take the second derivative of Z,

2 ln(

(cid:5)

dZ
dC 2
R

=

2 ln(

ˆCR =

1
2

ln(

W+ + 1
2n
W− + 1
2n

),

(7)

where n is the total number of vectors. Equation (7) is then used to calculate
the conﬁdence-rate ˆCRt for pattern Rt at each round t.

3.4 CCRBoost Algorithm

As described in Algorithm 1, the ﬁrst task of the CCRBoost algorithm is to
identify spatio-temporal patterns of diﬀerent sizes and shapes with respect to
spatial space during each period of time. To add spatio-temporal dimension to
our feature, a clustering step is adopted to ﬁnd the crime distributions at local
level in diﬀerent time periods. K-Means, but not limited to, is chosen to ﬁnd these
patterns. We perform K-Means K times to obtain 1+2+. . .+K clusters and then
train classiﬁers from each cluster to extract local spatio-temporal patterns at
diﬀerent granularity levels. The data is divided into M subsets before clustering
by certain length of time interval. For example, if the raw crime data is processed
by month, then M equals to 12 when one year worth of data is used. As a result,
there are total M × (1 + 2 + . . . + K) possible patterns acquired from these M
subsets.

Next, the weights of the entire data set is set to be in a probability distribution
which makes the total weight equals to 1. The data set is then randomly divided
into two subsets, GrowSet and PruneSet. This split is based on the total
weight instead of the number of records. By calling BuildChain(), an ensemble
spatio-temporal pattern R is built from those local patterns. This R gives the
minimum Z value while evaluating R on GrowSet. Furthermore, P runeChain()
is called to trim the list of R and prevents R from over ﬁtting by using PruneSet
to reevaluate R and then obtain the ﬁnal ensemble pattern Rt. The conﬁdence-
rate ˆCRt is then calculated by evaluating Rt on the entire data set using Equation
(7). Based on ˆCRt , the boosting algorithm updated the weights of those vectors
that are classiﬁed as hotspots. This weight update function is deﬁned as:

Dt+1(i) =

Dt(i)

exp(yi ˆCRt )

, if xi ∈ Rt

(8)

The goal is to exponentially lower the weights on those vectors that are recog-
nized by the current global pattern. This way, the data instances which have not
been ﬁtted to the pattern are getting more attentions for the next round.

180

C.-H. Yu et al.

The boosting process is repeated for T times, where T is a user-deﬁned vari-
able. At the end, T ensemble spatio-temporal patterns, R1, R2, . . . , RT , and
T conﬁdence-rates, ˆCR1 , ˆCR2, . . . , ˆCRT are produced. The formula of the ﬁnal
global spatio-temporal pattern is deﬁned as:

(cid:6)

(cid:3)

h(x) =

hotspot
Rt|x∈Rt
coldspot otherwise

ˆCRt > α

,

(9)

while α is a user-deﬁned threshold.

By taking an input vector x, this formula evaluates x over each ensemble
pattern Rt. If x is recognized by Rt as a hotspot, then ˆCRt is added to the total
conﬁdence score h(x). x is predicted as a hotspot if h(x) is greater than the
threshold α. Normally, this threshold α is set to zero. This ensemble learning
algorithm is inspired by Cohen and Singer’s research in [2]. The steps of the
CCRBoost algorithm are given in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1. CCRBoost Algorithm
1. Given crime data (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn).
2. K is a user-deﬁned variable and M is the total number of time periods.
3. for k = 1 . . . K do
4.
5.

for m = 1 . . . M do

Run K-Means using the vectors in period m to generate k clusters. Then, k
spatio-temporal patterns are extracted from these clusters.

end for

6.
7. end for
8. Balance the data set by weights.
9. for t = 1 . . . T do
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15. end for
16. The ﬁnal global spatio-temporal pattern is deﬁned as:

Normalize the weights, let Dt be a probability distribution.
Divide weighted data into two sets, GrowSet and P runeSet.
Call BuildChain() and then P runeChain() to obtain Rt.
Calculate ˆCRt using entire data set and Equation (7).
Update the weights based on Equation (8).

(cid:2)

(cid:3)
hotspot
Rt:x∈Rt
coldspot otherwise

h(x) =

ˆCRt > α

, α is a user-deﬁned threshold.

4 Case Study: Forecasting Residential Burglary in a

Northeastern City of the U.S.A.

Data Conﬁguration: 4-years’ (January 2006 to December 2009) crime records
have been used for the evaluation. In addition, three diﬀerent grid resolutions
have been applied to generate three data sets from the original crime records.

Crime Forecasting Using Spatio-temporal Pattern

181

These three resolutions have the squared cell/block with edge lengths of 800,
600, and 450 meters, respectively.

The targeting crime to be predicted is residential burglary in our experiments.
Residential burglary is a particularly interesting crime to study from a predic-
tion perspective since the near repeat hypothesis suggests that proximity to a
burgled residence increases the likelihood of victimization of other domiciles in
the neighborhood[12].

Based on the criminology theory[6] and after consulting with the domain
experts, six categories of incidences are identiﬁed having the higher correlation
with residential burglary crime than others. These six categories are arrest, com-
mercial burglary, foreclosure, motor vehicle larceny, 911 call, and street robbery.
Thus, the aggregations of these six categories from the crime records are used
as the crime indicators in our experiments.

The Choice of Pattern Learning Classiﬁer: LADTree[5] has been cho-
sen as the base classiﬁer to identify these patterns in our experiments because
LADTree adapts same conﬁdence-rated system to grow a decision tree. However,
our algorithm is not limited to LADTree because a spatio-temporal pattern can
be represented in any format or model as long as it can tell whether a vector is
a hotspot.

Clustering Approach in Finding Spatio-temporal Patterns: In this
experiment, the eﬀectiveness of K is evaluated. The other user-deﬁned variables
T (The number of boosting iteration) and α (The threshold for h(x)) are set to
500 and 0, respectively. The results of this experiment are obtained from three
data sets with diﬀerent grid cell sizes. When K = 1, the data is not clustered.
Therefore, the results obtained from the setting of K = 1 is used as the baseline
to compare with others. According to the results shown in Figure 2, the clustering
approach yields not only the better overall accuracy but also the better F1-
score on hotspots. This is because using clustering enhances the feature with
spatial dimension by taking into account the crime distribution at local levels.
Moreover, we found that the performance reaches certain level when K = 4 and
then maintains at this level when K ≥ 5. This shows that the patterns lose the
true representative of local crime distributions when the resolution is set too high
and suggests that there are less than or equal to 5 diﬀerent levels of local crime
patterns in our target city. Thus, K is set to 5 in the rest of our experiments.

Comparing Spatio-Temporal Pattern Features with Random Sam-
pling Features: In this experiment, the variable K is used to decide the number
of random sampling data sets. This sampling method randomly selects 50% of
the data records from a monthly data set for 1 + 2 + . . . + K times without re-
placement, which means that there is no duplicated records in each sample. This
method constructs 1 + 2 + . . . + K samples with uniﬁed size and then trains the
base classiﬁers from them using the LADTree algorithm. The purpose is to have
same number of features while comparing random sampling with the proposed
spatio-temporal pattern.

Next, our conﬁdence-rate boosting algorithm is used to pick features from
those patterns generated from random sampled clusters and then build a global

182

C.-H. Yu et al.

 

 

y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A

0.86

0.84

0.82

0.8

0.78

0.76

0.74

0.72

0.7
1

 

0.85

0.8

0.75

1
F

0.7

0.65

0.6

0.55

2

3

4

5

K

6

7

8

9

10

0.5

 
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

K

800−meter 

600−meter 

450−meter 

Fig. 2. The results of using diﬀerent K for clustering on 3 data sets

pattern. By this way, we can tell that which kind of feature delivers the bet-
ter prediction results. According to Figure 3, using spatio-temperal patterns
has better performance regardless the resolution of the data set. Thus, spatio-
temperal patterns do have the advantage over random sampling due to their
spatio-temporal multi-dimensional characteristic.

 

 

Pattern (800−meter)

Sampling (800−meter)

Pattern (600−meter)

Sampling (600−meter)

Pattern (450−meter)

Sampling (450−meter)

y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A

0.86

0.84

0.82

0.8

0.78

0.76

0.74

0.72

0.85

0.8

0.75

0.7

1
F

0.65

0.6

0.55

0.7

 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

0.5

 
1

K

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

K

Fig. 3. Comparing spatio-temperal patterns with random sampling on diﬀerent
datasets

Comparing with Classiﬁcation Approaches: Using the same crime data
sets, other commonly used classiﬁcation methods are adapted to generate the
prediction results to compare with our proposed algorithm. Support Vector Ma-
chine (SVM), C4.5, Naive Bayes classiﬁer, and LADTree[5] are chosen in this
experiment. As shown in Table 1, our proposed CCRBoost algorithm has the
best accuracy and F1-score over other classiﬁers on all three data sets.

Comparing CCRBoost with AdaBoost: During this experiment, the var-
ious numbers of iterations, T , are used in comparing our algorithm with the
AdaBoost[4] algorithm. LADTree is chosen as the base learning classiﬁer in both
algorithms. Shown in Figure 4, the accuracy obtained from the AdaBoost algo-
rithm reaches its ceiling when T > 50. However, our CCRBoost algorithm not
only can obtain better accuracy but also has better convergence rate throughout

Crime Forecasting Using Spatio-temporal Pattern

183

Table 1. The results of comapring CCRBoost with existing classiﬁers

Data Set

Method
SVM
C4.5

NaiveBayes
LADTree
CCRBoost

800-meter

450-meter
Accuracy F1 Accuracy F1 Accuracy F1

600-meter

0.801
0.817
0.667
0.500
0.675
0.730
0.757
0.772
0.857 0.818

0.742
0.776
0.667
0.500
0.647
0.703
0.728
0.702
0.820 0.746

0

0.489

0.651
0.500
0.592
0.667
0.644
0.487
0.772 0.610

three data sets. In conclusion, the boosting eﬀect of our algorithm is more eﬃ-
cient than AdaBoost because our algorithm enhanced with new spatio-temporal
features has a strong impact in predicting crime.

0.805

0.8

0.795

0.79

y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A

 

0.785

0.78

0.775

 
10

AdaBoost

CCRBoost

 

20

50

100

300

T (Iterations)

Fig. 4. Comparing AdaBoost with CCRBoost on diﬀerent iterations T

The Resulting Global Spatio-temporal Pattern: The selection of the
local patterns used in the ﬁnal spatio-temporal pattern has been visualized on
the map, which is shown in Figure 5. The red grid cells represent hotspots and
blue cells are coldspots. The ﬁrst pattern chosen by the proposed algorithm is
a cluster from September 2007. The locations of this cluster are consistent with
known crime pattern of our target city. The second cluster representing August
2009 data identiﬁes crime hotspots that were excluded from the ﬁrst cluster.
More importantly, this second cluster is useful for pinpointing coldspots areas
that have some protective factor against residential burglary and other crimes.
As a result, the ﬁrst two clusters are complementary in identifying locations
where we would expect residential burglary across the entire city as well as
areas that are coldspots. Interestingly and consistent with criminological liter-
ature, both clusters are in the summer months when children are out of school
and individuals may take vacations and be less vigilant about protecting their
property. It may be that there is an increased likelihood of residential burglary
in this city during the summer time. Based on the consistency with actual crime
patterns, our algorithm does ﬁnd the patterns which recognize not only the spa-
tial but also the temporal factors that are useful for criminal justice professionals
in predicting the incidence of future crime.

184

C.-H. Yu et al.

(1) September 2007 

(2) August 2009

Fig. 5. The ﬁrst two local patterns used in the ﬁnal global spatio-temporal pattern
resulting from 800-meter grid data set. The red blocks are hotspots and blues are
coldspots. (Better viewed in color).

5 Conclusions

From a practical standpoint, the patterns selected from this algorithm are in-
dicative of the true locations of residential burglaries throughout the target city.
This gives the concrete evidence that using proposed spatio-temporal pattern
has the great potential in predicting crime. The ultimate goal of our research is
to build a crime prediction system with strong predictive power, which is able
to provide forecast in a timely manner and requires less amount of data inputs.
Ultimately, the law enforcement is able to ﬁght criminals pro-actively instead of
passively.

Acknowledgments. The work was partially funded by the National Institute
of Justice (No.2009- DE-BX-K219).

References

1. Cohen, J., Gorr, W.L.: Development of crime forecasting and mapping systems for
use by police. H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management. Carnegie
Mellon University (2005)

2. Cohen, W., Singer, Y.: A simple, fast, and eﬀective rule learner. In: Proceedings

of The Sixteenth National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (1999)

3. Eck, J., Chainey, S., Cameron, J., Wilson, R.: Mapping crime: Understanding

hotspots (2005)

4. Freund, Y., Schapire, R.: A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning
and an application to boosting. In: Computational Learning Theory: Eurocolt, pp.
23–37. Springer (1995)

5. Holmes, G., Pfahringer, B., Kirkby, R., Frank, E., Hall, M.: Multiclass alternating
decision trees. In: Elomaa, T., Mannila, H., Toivonen, H. (eds.) ECML 2002. LNCS
(LNAI), vol. 2430, pp. 161–172. Springer, Heidelberg (2002)

Crime Forecasting Using Spatio-temporal Pattern

185

6. Kelling, G., Coles, C.: Fixing Broken Windows: Restoring Order and Reducing

Crime in Our Communities. Free Press (1998)

7. Kumar, M.V., Chandrasekar, C.: Spatial clustering simulation on analysis of spa-
tialtemporal crime hotspot for predicting crime activities. International Journal of
Computer Science and Information Technologies 2(6), 2864–2867 (2011)

8. Mohler, G.O., Short, M.B., Brantingham, P.J., Schoenberg, F.P., Tita, G.E.: Self-
exciting point process modeling of crime. Journal of the American Statistical As-
sociation 106(493) (2011)

9. Ratcliﬀe, J.H.: Aoristic signatures and the spatio-temporal analysis of high volume

crime patterns. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 18(1), 23–43 (2002)

10. Schapire, R.E., Singer, Y.: Improved boosting algorithms using conﬁdence-rated

predictions. Machine learning 37(3), 297–336 (1999)

11. Short, M.B., Bertozzi, A.L., Brantingham, P.J.: Nonlinear patterns in urban crime:
Hotspots, bifurcations, and suppression. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Sys-
tems 9(2), 462–483 (2010)

12. Townsley, M., Homel, R., Chaseling, J.: Infectious burglaries. A test of the near

repeat hypothesis. British Journal of Criminology 43(3), 615–633 (2003)


