Detecting and Analyzing Inﬂuenza Epidemics

with Social Media in China(cid:2)

Fang Zhang1, Jun Luo1,2, Chao Li1, Xin Wang3, and Zhongying Zhao1

1 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Hong Kong, China

3 Department of Geomatics Engineering, University of Calgary, Canada
{fang.zhang,jun.luo,chao.li1,zy.zhao}@siat.ac.cn,

xcwang@ucalgary.ca

Abstract. In recent years, social media has become important and omnipresent
for social network and information sharing. Researchers and scientists have be-
gun to mine social media data to predict varieties of social, economic, health and
entertainment related real-world phenomena. In this paper, we exhibit how so-
cial media data can be used to detect and analyze real-world phenomena with
several data mining techniques. Speciﬁcally, we use posts from TencentWeibo to
detect inﬂuenza and analyze inﬂuenza trends. We build a support vector machine
(SVM) based classiﬁer to classify inﬂuenza posts. In addition, we use associa-
tion rule mining to extract strongly associated features as additional features of
posts to overcome the limitation of 140 words for posts. We also use sentimental
analysis to classify the reposts without feature and uncommented reposts. The
experimental results show that by combining those techniques, we can improve
the precision and recall by at least ten percent. Finally, we analyze the spatial and
temporal patterns for positive inﬂuenza posts and tell when and where inﬂuenza
epidemic is more likely to occur.

Keywords: Inﬂuenza Epidemics, Social Media, Data Mining.

1 Introduction

Inﬂuenza is a severe disease and seasonally spreads around the world in epidemics,
causing over 3 million yearly cases of severe illness and about 250,000 to 500,000
yearly death1 Global attention has been drawn to this issue from both medical and
technical perspectives. However, inﬂuenza is unable to be detected under the traditional
surveillance system both effectively and efﬁciently, thus making the disease monitoring
a challenging topic.

In recent years, social media, for instance, Facebook, Twitter, MySpace and Tencen-
Weibo, has become a popular platform among people on which they create, share, and

(cid:2) This research is partially funded by the NSF of China (Grant No. 11271351 and 61303167)
and the Basic Research Program of Shenzhen (Grant No. JCYJ20130401170306838 and
JC201105190934A). Xin Wang’s research is partially funded by the NSERC Discovery Grant.

1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Influenza

V.S. Tseng et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2014, Part I, LNAI 8443, pp. 90–101, 2014.
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014

Detecting and Analyzing Inﬂuenza Epidemics with Social Media

91

propagate information. Social media gains ascendancy over traditional media because
of its better performance in stability, fast propagation and efﬁcient resource utilization.
Therefore, it is gradually replacing traditional medias and grows in fast pace as the plat-
form of useful information sharing. Recent work has demonstrated that prediction of va-
rieties of phenomena can be made by using social media data. These phenomena include
disease transmission [18], movie box-ofﬁce revenues [4], and even elections [20]. In this
paper we illustrate how social media can be used to detect and analyze inﬂuenza epi-
demics in China. Speciﬁcally, we consider the task of detecting and analyzing inﬂuenza
by utilizing the posts from TencentWeibo, one of the most popular social networks with
more than 500 million users in China.

We ﬁrst extract inﬂuenza-like posts from our TencentWeibo data corpus. The most
common inﬂuenza symptoms are chills, fever, runny nose, sore throat, headache, cough-
ing, fatigue and discomfort. Although, these symptoms as keywords can be utilized to
determine whether a post is an inﬂuenza-like post, inaccurate, ambiguous or keywords
related posts might still disturb the collection of the real inﬂuenza-like posts such as (all
posts and words are translated from Chinese to English in this paper):

– One should have more water when catching ﬂu.
– Avian ﬂu is under epidemics this spring.
– Jesus, fevering, have I got cold?

These posts all mention the word of “ﬂu” or ﬂu symptoms. Nevertheless that does not
mean that the posters have been affected by inﬂuenza. We consider these posts (news,
advices or suspicion) as negative inﬂuenza posts. Our goal is to detect positive inﬂuenza
posts and analysis inﬂuenza epidemics in China with TencentWeibo data. As discussed
above, it is necessary to extract positive inﬂuenza posts from the whole dataset to get
more accurate results. In this paper, we propose a machine learning based classiﬁer to
ﬁlter out negative inﬂuenza posts with 0.900 precision and 0.913 recall.

Next, after classiﬁcation, TencentWeibo data is analyzed and processed from the
perspective of time and space respectively. From the perspective of time we can ﬁnd
out which place is more likely for inﬂuenza outbreak and from the perspective of space,
we can discover when is more likely for inﬂuenza outbreak in one city or a certain
province in China.

This paper is organized as follows: related works are presented in next section. In
Section 3, a short introduction to TencentWeibo and the characteristics of our dataset are
provided. In Section 4, several data mining techniques which are used in our research
are introduced. In Section 5, evaluation of our model is shown. In Section 6, our model
is applied in detecting and analyzing inﬂuenza epidemics in China. We conclude and
give the future work in Section 7.

2 Related Works

In recent years, scientists have been using social media data or other information to
detect inﬂuenza epidemics and to provide earlier inﬂuenza warnings.

Espino et al. [7] proposed a public health early warning system by utilizing data from
telephone triage (TT) which is a public service to give advice to users via telephone

92

F. Zhang et al.

in 2003. They obtained TT data from a healthcare call center services and software
company. By investigating the relationship between the number of telephone calls and
inﬂuenza epidemics, then reported a signiﬁcation correlation.

Magruder [13] utilized the amount of over-the-counter (OTC) drug sales to build a
possible early warning indicator of human disease like inﬂuenza. Inﬂuenza patients re-
quirement for anti-inﬂuenza drugs makes this approach reasonable. They reported the
magnitude of correlations between clinical data and some OTC sales data and then mea-
sured the time lead after controlling for day-of-week effects and some holiday effects.
Ginsberg et al. [8] built a system, utilizing Google web search queries, to generate
more comprehensive models for use in inﬂuenza surveillance. Their approach demon-
strated high precision, obtaining an average correlation of 0.97 with the CDC-observed
inﬂuenza-like illness (ILI) percentage.

Lampos el al. [11] proposed a regression model, by applying Balasso, the boot-
strapped version of Lasso, for tracking the prevalence of ILI in part of UK using the
contents of Twitter. Compared to the actual HPA’s ILI rates, their model achieved high
accuracy.

Aramaki el al. [3] proposed a system to detect inﬂuenza epidemics. First, the system
extracts inﬂuenza related tweets via Twitter API. Next, a support vector machine (SVM)
based classiﬁer was used to extract tweets that mention actual inﬂuenza patients. Their
approach was feasible with 0.89 correlation to the gold standard.

However, these previous approaches ignored some major characteristics of posts that
may impede the classiﬁcation. First, all posts and reposts have 140 word limitation.
That could cause limited features we can use in SVM. Second, the reposts could be no
comments or the comments without features. We propose words association rules and
sentiment analysis to overcome those problems and improve the classiﬁcation precision
and recall.

3 Dataset

3.1 TencentWeibo Dataset

Launched in April, 2010 by Tencent Holding Limited, TencentWeibo is a Chinese
micro-blogging (weibo) website, which is extremely popular around China, consist-
ing of more than half a billion of users (0.54 billion users by Dec, 20122). Like Twitter,
each user of TencentWeibo has a set of followers, and from this point TencentWeibo
can be considered as a social network. Users can upload and share with its followers
photos, videos and text within a 140 word limit, known as posts like tweets in Twitter,
that typically consist of personal information about the users. The posts composed by
one user are displayed on the user’s proﬁle page, so that its followers can either just
read, comment or repost the same content and post to their own pages. For one user,
it is also possible to send a direct message to another user. A repost, called retweet in
Twitter, is a post made by one user that is forwarded by another user. Reposts are useful
and fast for information spreading, like photos, videos, text and links through Tencen-
tWeibo community. Due to its huge amount of users and prevalence, TencentWeibo is

2 http://it.21cn.com/itnews/a/2013/0121/11/20247640.shtml

Detecting and Analyzing Inﬂuenza Epidemics with Social Media

93

increasingly used by a number of companies and organizations to advertise products
and disseminate information. Mining TencentWeibo data to make the future prediction
on some social phenomena has become an innovative approach in China.

3.2 Dataset Characteristics

The data we used in our experiments was obtained by downloading the posts from Ten-
centWeibo.com with TencentWeibo Search API. We used “ﬂu” and its common inﬂuenza
symptoms, such as fever, runny nose, as keywords to ensure that the posts we obtained
were inﬂuenza related. We obtained 2.59 million inﬂuenza related posts over a period
of six months from Nov, 2012 to May, 2013. Most of these posts contain location infor-
mation which indicates the poster’s living city. By accurately classifying inﬂuenza posts
from this data set, we can analyze spatial and temporal patterns of inﬂuenza epidemics.

3.3 Label Rules

Three annotators are responsible for assigning positive or negative label to every post
in both training dataset and test dataset. One post is labeled as a positive only when it
meet one of the following requirements.

– Post indicates the poster has inﬂuenza. Since each post has one attribute showing
the city name which indicates where the post is sent, we can use this information to
do spatial analysis of the positive posts.

– The post mentions other person (relative or friend) has inﬂuenza and also mentions
the location of the other person. For example, one post says “My poor brother got
fever in Beijing”. Then we annotate it as positive post and the count of inﬂuenza
case in Beijing will be increased by one. Otherwise, if there is no indication of lo-
cation, then the post is annotated as negative post since it has no use to our analysis.
– For reposts, if one repost has no comment, we consider the reposter is consented
with the original poster, thus the repost is annotated as the original post’s label. If
the repost has comment, we label it according to the previous two rules.

Each of these three annotators individually labeled a post x as negative (-1) or posi-
tive (+1) inﬂuenza-like post described as y1, y2, and y3. Each post was given the ﬁnal
i=1 yi, yi ∈ {+1,−1}, where the positive value
label by the following function L =
of L indicates a positive inﬂuenza post, while the negative value of L indicates a nega-
tive inﬂuenza post.

(cid:2)3

4 Methodology

We build a support vector machine (SVM) [5, 12, 14, 16] based classiﬁer to classify
inﬂuenza posts with the help of association rule mining and sentiment analysis. SVMs
are well-known supervised learning models used in machine learning, particularly for
text classiﬁcation and regression analysis. In terms of linear SVM, the training data set
D with points is deﬁned as below.

D = {(xi, yi)|xi ∈ Rp, yi ∈ {+1,−1}}n

i=0

(1)

94

F. Zhang et al.
−→
xi is a p-dimensional real vector and yi is the label of the point
Where
which class

−→
−→
xi, indicating to
xi belongs. And the classiﬁcation function of linear SVM is:

(cid:3)

f (x) = sign(

αiyixT

i x + b)

i

(2)

Where the value of f (x) indicates the point’s class, αi is Lagrange multiplier and b is
the intercept.

In the rest of this section, several techniques that we utilized in our model will be

illustrated.

4.1 Association Rule Mining

Most TencentWeibo posts are short texts with signiﬁcant characteristics of short length
and few features. If potential strongly associated features can be added to the original
texts, making longer length and more diversiﬁed features, classiﬁcation performance
will be improved. In data mining, association rule learning [1, 2, 9, 21] is a popular and
well researched method for discovering interesting relations between variables in large
databases. For these reasons, association rule learning is applied to ﬁnd strong rules in
our data.
According to the original deﬁnition by Agrawal et al. [1] the problem of association
rule mining in our research is deﬁned as: Let I = {i1, i2, ..., in} be a set of n texts
features called items. Let D = {t1, t2, ..., tn} be a set of posts called the database. In
a given database D, an association rule is similar to a form of A⇒B where A, B∈I and
(cid:4)
B=∅, the sets of items A and B are respectively called antecedent and consequent of
A
the rule. An easy attempt of differentiation of strong rules is calculating its support and
conﬁdence, and thus, mining frequent patterns is the key to obtain strong association
rules.

Methods like Apriori [2] can be used for mining association rules and frequency pat-
terns. Apriori is not an efﬁcient algorithm as it needs to ﬁnd all the candidate itemsets
and to repeatedly scan the data base during the process. However, in our research, since
frequent patterns with 2 features, such as {cold, runny nose}, are needed and the can-
didate sets with more than 2 features (k > 2) are avoided, Apriori algorithm becomes
efﬁcient and is applied in our research.

Frequent patterns with a given minimum thresholds on support and conﬁdence are
regarded as strong association rules which then will be utilized to extend short posts to
improve classiﬁcation performance. For example, if “cold”⇒“runny nose” is a strong
association rule in our data base, then word token “runny nose” will be added into the
texts of the posts which contain word token “cold” as a feature.

4.2 Sentiment Analysis

Sentiment analysis [6, 15, 17, 19] refers to the application of natural language process-
ing (NLP), computational linguistics, and identiﬁcation plus extraction of subjective
information over text analysis3 Generally speaking, sentiment analysis is designed for

3 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sentiment analysis

Detecting and Analyzing Inﬂuenza Epidemics with Social Media

95

acquiring the attitude of the corresponding author or lecturer upon his or her contextual
works on a comprehensive level. The basics of sentiment analysis is to categorize the
absolute standing or meaning of the given material words based on the opinion deliv-
ered into three classiﬁcation positive, negative, or neutral.

In our research, an important component of sentiment analysis which focuses on the
automatic identiﬁcation for whether a repost contains positive or negative opinion about
inﬂuenza is to identify the emotion expressed in the posts if the according poster has
infected with inﬂuenza.

In our dataset, each post that is downloaded by keywords is one of the following

three kinds:

– Posts with features after feature selection.
– Commented reposts with an original post, but no features in comment.
– Uncommented reposts with an origin post.

For the ﬁrst kind of posts, the SVM classiﬁer directly classiﬁes them. As to the rest
two kinds, we separate the reposts r into two parts, comment part c and original post
part o. Take “Fortunately, I didn’t. || @ someone: I got ﬂu” as an example. “Fortunately,
I didn’t. ”is part c and “I got ﬂu.” is part o. After feature selection, however, this post
has no features. The SVM randomly classiﬁes it as positive inﬂuenza post or negative
one; nevertheless, the poster deﬁnitely has not got inﬂuenza. In this situation, sentiment
analysis is needed to improve the SVM’s precision. Our approach can be described as:

L(r) =

(cid:5)

s(c) =

(cid:5)

s(c) × f (o), f (o) = +1

f (c), f (o) = −1

,

+1, no negative word in c
−1, has negative word in c

(3)

(4)

where f (o) is deﬁned in formula 2, s(c) indicates whether comment part c has nega-
tive attitude to the origin part o (we regard reposters have positive attitude towards the
original post if the according reposts have no comment on the original posts), and the
value of L(r) indicates the repost’s class.

5 Experiments

We collected about 2.59 million posts posted within the time period from Nov 2012 to
May 2013, using TencentWeibo Search API. We separated those posts into three groups.
Training data consists of 4092 posts which were randomly selected by computer
and annotated by 3 annotators. Then these posts were used for the purpose of SVM
classiﬁer training.

Test data consists of 2500 posts randomly selected by computer and annotated by 3
annotators like training data. These data were used to evaluate the SVM based classiﬁer.
Experiment data are the rest of the posts collected. They were used in experi-
ments of inﬂuenza epidemics detection and analysis. Those posts were separated into
six groups by month within the time range that we studied, from Nov 2012 to April
2013.

96

F. Zhang et al.

Table 1. Examples of positive and negative weighted signiﬁcant features of our SVM classiﬁer

have cold

feel ill
fevering
runny nose

Positive Weighted Feature Weight Negative Weighted Feature Weight
132.99
86.98
56.43
47.41
46.23
43.00
41.64
39.99
37.04
36.01

1713.39
385.70
146.85
85.06
82.26
48.61
48.22
40.01
38.67
37.43

share
later
little
lack
sneeze
nervous

fatigue
faint
healthy
question

very

sore throat

serious

rhinobyon
headache
seemingly

We ﬁrst applied feature selection for SVM training because of three reasons: (1) To
improve the efﬁciency of training and testing process. (2) To delete noisy features. (3)
To improve classiﬁcation precision.

We calculated Chi-squared value for every word token that appeared in the training
data set. As SVM features, top 1,000 word tokens ranked by Chi-squared value were uti-
lized. Before word segmentation and vectorization, punctuation and special characters
were striped, mentions of user names (the“@” tag), reposts (the “||” tag) and expres-
sions (the “/” tag) were removed, and all other language characters were ignored. Table
1 lists examples of signiﬁcant features we used as SVM features.

Besides precision and recall, F1 =

which is a weighted har-
monic mean that trades off precision versus recall was utilized to evaluate our classiﬁer.
In our experiment, the kernel of SVMs is linear. The evaluation of this SVM classiﬁer
on test set showed 0.79 precision, 0.80 recall and 0.795 F1. There are two reasons to
cause relative low precision and recall:

2 ∗ precision ∗ recall
precision + recall

– A TencentWeibo post consists text with a 140 word limit and most of the posts
are short texts with only several words. Not even a single feature is contained in
some processed short posts after word segmentation and vectorization. Our SVM
classiﬁer’s scheme of random labeling them leads to relative low precision and
recall.

– In terms of reposts, reposts without comment are also qualiﬁed for the condition
above, as reposts with comment always indicate the reposter’s attitude on the orig-
inal post. However a SVM classiﬁer is not capable of analyzing poster’s sentiment
on this kind of post.

We handled the ﬁrst case by applying rule mining to extend word-segmented posts
to obtain more features before vectorization. Based on our training data, we learned
some word association rules as shown in Table 2 with the threshold of 0.01 minimum
support and 0.6 minimum conﬁdence. However, the performance of the SVM classiﬁer
with 0.797 precision, 0.804 recall and 0.800 F1did not improve too much.

We then utilized sentiment analysis to improve the evaluation of classiﬁcation.
First, we collected thousands of emotional-related words and put them into 2 groups

Detecting and Analyzing Inﬂuenza Epidemics with Social Media

97

Table 2. Examples of word associations rules with support and conﬁdence

Feature 2 Support Conﬁdence
Feature 1
0.085
feeling ill
having cold
0.011
sore throat having cold
0.017
runny nose having cold
0.013
runny nose
sneezing
serious
0.012
having cold
question having solved 0.011
0.011
0.015

0.67
0.60
0.65
0.65
0.69
0.65
0.65
0.67

having cold

lack
bad

voting

Table 3. Examples of both emotional negative and emotional positive words

Negative no don’t think so deny don’t agree disappoint abhorrent annoyed angry insane bad
Positive
glad smart good

I think so

gladness

amused

happy

yes

accept

agree

(emotional negative and emotional positive). Table 3 lists examples of both emotional
negative and emotional positive words. We then applied formula 3 and 4 to classify
reposts with an original post.

As shown in Figure 1, when considering word associations and sentiment of posters,
the classiﬁcation performance substantially improves, achieving up to 0.900 precision,
0.913 recall and 0.905 F1.

Fig. 1. Summary of evaluation results. SVM1 represents original SVM classiﬁer, SVM2 repre-
sents the SVM based classiﬁer with association rule mining, and SVM3 represents the SVM
based classiﬁer with association rule mining and sentiment analysis.

98

F. Zhang et al.

Fig. 2. Spatial analysis of inﬂuenza epidemics in China from Nov 2012 to Apr 2013. The darker
colored area indicates a higher inﬂuenza index and the lighter colored means a lower index.

6 Spatial and Temporal Analysis of Inﬂuenza Epidemics

A simple model was built on the experiment dataset to monthly estimate the aver-
age extent of inﬂuenza epidemics of every province in Chinese mainland. For every
month from Nov 2012 to Apr 2013, our model automatically calculates the index of
each provinces inﬂuenza epidemics by summing each provinces positive inﬂuenza posts
which were extracted from the whole posts corpus with the help of the SVM based clas-
siﬁer, dividing the sum by net citizen scale of the certain province which was obtained
from Statistical Report on Internet Development in China published by China Internet
Network Information Center (CNNIC) in 2012, and multiplying the result with 10,000
to make the ﬁnal number more readable. For example, in Nov 2012, in our database
Beijing has 6,916 positive inﬂuenza posts and 13,790,000 net citizens. Therefore, the
inﬂuenza index of Beijing in Nov 2012 is 6, 916 × 10, 000/13, 790, 000 = 5.015.

6.1 Spatial Analysis of Inﬂuenza Epidemics

After computing the monthly index of inﬂuenza epidemics in each province, we as-
sign that value to the capital city of the corresponding province. The we use Krig-
ing [10]which is a geostatistical estimator that infers the value of a random ﬁeld at
an unobserved location to spatially interpolate inﬂuenza epidemics index of the whole
map. Figure 2 represents the distribution of inﬂuenza epidemics in China from Nov
2012 to April 2013. From Figure 2, we obtain some conclusions as below:

Detecting and Analyzing Inﬂuenza Epidemics with Social Media

99

Fig. 3. Time analysis of inﬂuenza epidemics in China from Nov 2012 to Apr 2013. Different
kinds of dots represent different provinces and each dot shows the inﬂuenza index of a given
province in the given month.

– With the drop of temperature from Nov 2012 to Dec 2012, high inﬂuenza-index
regions are increasing and low inﬂuenza-index regions are reducing. On the con-
trary, with the rise of temperature from Dec 2012 to Apr 2013, high inﬂuenza-index
regions are reducing and low inﬂuenza-index regions are increasing.

– From Nov 2012 to Apr 2013, southeast coastal provinces including Guangdong,
Guangxi, and Hainan have higher inﬂuenza indices. While west provinces including
Xinjiang, Qinghai, and Tibet have relatively lower inﬂuenza indices.

– Areas such as Beijing-Tianjin, Chengdu-Chongqing, Yangtze River Delta, and Pearl
River Delta with bigger ﬂuid population and more density of population have higher
inﬂuenza indices. Areas such as Xinjiang, Xizang (Tibet), Qinghai, and Gansu
where density of population is far smaller than the areas mentioned above have
lower inﬂuenza indices.

6.2 Temporal Analysis of Inﬂuenza Epidemics

Figure 3 represents the inﬂuenza indices of each province in China mainland from Nov,
2012 to Apr, 2013. Some conclusions can be obtained by observing Figure 3:

– From Nov 2012 to Apr 2013, Guangxi, Guangdong, and Hainan have relatively
higher inﬂuenza indices than other provinces. Xizang and Qinghai contrarily have
relatively lower inﬂuenza indices.

100

F. Zhang et al.

– The inﬂuenza indices of Xizang and Qinghai from Nov 2012 to Apr 2013 slightly
change. However, the inﬂuenza indices of Guangxi, Hainan, and Henan ﬂuctuate a
relatively great deal.

7 Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we propose a TencentWeibo based inﬂuenza epidemics detection and anal-
ysis model with data mining techniques. Basically, we build a support vector machine
(SVM) based classiﬁer to classify inﬂuenza posts. In addition, we use association rule
mining to enrich the features of posts to overcome the limitation of 140 words for posts.
We also use sentimental analysis to classify the reposts without feature and uncom-
mented reposts. Our experimental results show that by combining those techniques, we
can improve the precision and recall by at least ten percent. Finally, we analyze the spa-
tial and temporal patterns for positive inﬂuenza posts and tell when and where inﬂuenza
epidemic is more likely to occur.

In future work, we will use more TencentWeibo data to verify our model’s efﬁciency
and effectiveness. Also we will focus on the personal prediction of a certain poster
whether he or she would catch inﬂuenza in the next a few days based on its personal
TencentWeibo data.

References

1. Agrawal, R., Imieli´nski, T., Swami, A.: Mining association rules between sets of items in

large databases. ACM SIGMOD Record 22, 207–216 (1993)

2. Agrawal, R., Srikant, R., et al.: Fast algorithms for mining association rules. In: Proc. 20th

Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases, VLDB, vol. 1215, pp. 487–499 (1994)

3. Aramaki, E., Maskawa, S., Morita, M.: Twitter catches the ﬂu: Detecting inﬂuenza epidemics
using twitter. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pp. 1568–1576. Association for Computational Linguistics (2011)

4. Asur, S., Huberman, B.A.: Predicting the future with social media. In: 2010 IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology (WI-IAT),
vol. 1, pp. 492–499. IEEE (2010)

5. Cortes, C., Vapnik, V.: Support-vector networks. Machine Learning 20(3), 273–297 (1995)
6. de Haaff, M.: Sentiment analysis, hard but worth it!, customerthink (2010), http://www.

customerthink.com/blog/sentiment analysis hard but worth it

7. Espino, J.U., Hogan, W.R., Wagner, M.M.: Telephone triage: a timely data source for surveil-
lance of inﬂuenza-like diseases. In: AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, vol. 2003, p.
215. American Medical Informatics Association (2003)

8. Ginsberg, J., Mohebbi, M.H., Patel, R.S., Brammer, L., Smolinski, M.S., Brilliant, L.: De-
tecting inﬂuenza epidemics using search engine query data. Nature 457(7232), 1012–1014
(2008)

9. Hipp, J., G¨untzer, U., Nakhaeizadeh, G.: Algorithms for association rule mining - general

survey and comparison. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 2(1), 58–64 (2000)

10. Krige, D.G.: A statistical approach to some mine valuation and allied problems on the Wit-

watersrand. PhD thesis, University of the Witwatersrand (1951)

11. Lampos, V., De Bie, T., Cristianini, N.: Flu detector - tracking epidemics on twitter. In:
Balc´azar, J.L., Bonchi, F., Gionis, A., Sebag, M. (eds.) ECML PKDD 2010, Part III. LNCS,
vol. 6323, pp. 599–602. Springer, Heidelberg (2010)

Detecting and Analyzing Inﬂuenza Epidemics with Social Media

101

12. Lin, C.-J.: A guide to support vector machines, Department of Computer Science, National

Taiwan University (2006)

13. Magruder, S.: Evaluation of over-the-counter pharmaceutical sales as a possible early warn-
ing indicator of human disease. Johns Hopkins University APL Technical Digest 24, 349–353
(2003)

14. Manning, C.D., Raghavan, P., Sch¨utze, H.: Introduction to information retrieval, vol. 1. Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge (2008)

15. Melville, P., Gryc, W., Lawrence, R.D.: Sentiment analysis of blogs by combining lexical
knowledge with text classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1275–1284. ACM (2009)

16. Meyer, D., Leisch, F., Hornik, K.: The support vector machine under test. Neurocomput-

ing 55(1), 169–186 (2003)

17. Pang, B., Lee, L., Vaithyanathan, S.: Thumbs up?: sentiment classiﬁcation using machine
learning techniques. In: Proceedings of the ACL 2002 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, vol. 10, pp. 79–86. Association for Computational Linguistics
(2002)

18. Sadilek, A., Kautz, H., Silenzio, V.: Predicting disease transmission from geo-tagged micro-

blog data. In: Twenty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, p. 11 (2012)

19. Thelwall, M., Buckley, K., Paltoglou, G., Cai, D., Kappas, A.: Sentiment strength detection
in short informal text. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol-
ogy 61(12), 2544–2558 (2010)

20. Tumasjan, A., Sprenger, T.O., Sandner, P.G., Welpe, I.M.: Predicting elections with twitter:
What 140 characters reveal about political sentiment. In: Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
tional AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, pp. 178–185 (2010)

21. Witten, I.H., Frank, E.: Data Mining: Practical machine learning tools and techniques. Mor-

gan Kaufmann (2005)


