Discovery of Regional Co-location Patterns

with k-Nearest Neighbor Graph

Feng Qian1, Kevin Chiew2, Qinming He1, Hao Huang1, and Lianhang Ma1

1 College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, P.R. China

2 School of Engineering, Tan Tao University, Vietnam

Abstract. The spatial co-location pattern mining discovers the subsets of fea-
tures of which the events are frequently located together in a geographic space.
The current research on this topic adopts a distance threshold that has limitations
in spatial data sets with various magnitudes of neighborhood distances, especially
for mining of regional co-location patterns. In this paper, we propose a hierar-
chical co-location mining framework by considering both varieties of neighbor-
hood distances and spatial heterogeneity. By adopting k-nearest neighbor graph
(kNNG) instead of distance threshold, we propose “distance variation coefﬁcient”
as a new measure to drive the mining process and determine an individual neigh-
borhood relationship graph for each region. The experimental results on a real
world data set verify the effectiveness of our framework.

Keywords: co-location pattern, kNNG, variation coefﬁcient.

1 Introduction

The spatial co-location pattern mining [1] discovers the subsets of features (co-locations)
of which the events are frequently located together in a geographic space. It has been
applied to many areas like mobile commerce, earth science, biology, public health, and
transportation [2]. Figure 1(a) shows a sample data set containing instances of six spatial
features represented by distinct shapes. The instances of features describe the presence
of their instances at different locations in a 2D or 3D space. A careful review reveals
four co-location patterns as illustrated in Figure 1(c). To discover these patterns, the
current research (see e.g., [2,3]) adopts an approach with two phases, namely (1) con-
verting the spatial data set into a neighborhood relationship graph (NRG for short) using
a distance threshold as illustrated in Figure 1(b) in which the distance threshold is de-
ﬁned as the maximal distance allowed for two events to be neighbors; and (2) ﬁnding
prevalent co-locations based on their clique instances in the derived graph.

The ﬁrst phase implicitly assumes the normal distances of neighbors being smaller
than the predeﬁned distance threshold. This requires an approximately uniform distri-
bution of spatial events across the space, as well as the joint distributions of features.
In real life however, the data density often varies across different areas, leading to more
complex joint distributions. For such data sets with various densities, an improper dis-
tance threshold may severely affect the mining results due to two reasons. (1) First, a
small distance threshold may ignore many clique instances of prevalent co-locations in
sparse areas, resulting in these co-locations being under-estimated. (2) Second, a large

J. Pei et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2013, Part I, LNAI 7818, pp. 174–186, 2013.
c(cid:2) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

Discovery of Regional Co-location Patterns

175

Co-location
  Patterns

{
{
{
{

,
,
,
,

}
}
,
,

}
}

(c)

Fig. 1. An illustrative example of spatial co-location pattern discovery

distance threshold may introduce irrelevant clique instances of candidate co-locations
in density areas, resulting in these co-locations being over-estimated.

Given the above concerns, we propose to ﬁnd the regional co-location patterns as an
extension to the conventional two-phase approaches. Our motivation comes from (1)
the inconsistency of neighborhood distances in a data space; that is, the distance be-
tween any two neighboring events varies across the space since the data densities vary
from region to region in the space. This inconsistency motivates us to investigate a new
measure “distance variation coefﬁcient” (see Section 3) rather than distance thresh-
old to drive the mining process; and (2) the existence of spatial heterogeneity which
demonstrates that most geographic processes vary by locations [4], and indicates that
the inconsistent co-location sets may be found from different regions [5]. For instance,
back to our example of mobile commerce, the requesting patterns in business regions
are usually different from those in tourist regions.

As a mining strategy, we propose to hierarchically merge spatial events into local
regions in the form of NRGs followed by passing them to the second phase of the con-
ventional approaches. To enable the regional co-location pattern discovery meaningful,
we partially inherit from the conventional approaches the assumption that a reasonable
region is supposed to have relatively consistent neighborhood distances. This means
the distances among the data points and their neighbors inside the region vary within a
small range. Besides, we assume that different regions have inconsistent co-locating in-
formation in terms of spatial heterogeneity. Given these, this paper addresses two prob-
lems: (1) identifying regions with consistent neighborhood distances and co-locating
information; and (2) specifying an individual NRG for each identiﬁed region.

We adopt k-nearest neighbor graphs (kNNG) that capture more natural neighbor-
hoods [6] to describe the consistency of neighborhood distances within a region. Similar
to distance thresholds, predeﬁning k value for each region may lead to under-estimation
or over-estimation of co-locations. Instead, we introduce a new measure “distance vari-
ation co-efﬁcient” to control the range of distance varying and automatically determine
k value for each region. With kNNG, the regions’ NRGs are naturally prepared.

We then are able to deﬁne the similarity of co-location information between adjacent
regions by passing these graphs to the second phase of the conventional approaches.
The deﬁnition of similarity is a measure about whether the corresponding regions share
consistent co-location information and are qualiﬁed to be merged. Analogous to kNNG,
the mutual k-nearest neighbors (MkNN) naturally capture the inter-connectivity of ad-
jacent regions [7,8]. We adopt MkNN to exclude the real region boundaries when hier-
archically merging the regions.

176

F. Qian et al.

In summary, our contributions are as follows. (1) We propose a hierarchical mining
framework to discover regional co-locations by considering both varieties of neighbor-
hood distances and spatial heterogeneity. (2) We propose a novel “distance variation
coefﬁcient” to drive the mining process and determine an individual NRG for each re-
gion. (3) We evaluate our mining algorithm with experiments on a real world data set
by comparing against the conventional approaches using distance thresholds.

The remaining sections are organized as follows. We ﬁrst review the current research
results on spatial co-location pattern mining in Section 2, followed by giving a formal
description for the research problem and some basic deﬁnitions in Section 3. We then
present our hierarchical mining framework to discover regional co-location patterns in
Section 4, together with the experimental evaluation in Section 5 before concluding our
work in Section 6.

2 Literature Review

Various algorithms have been proposed for spatial co-location pattern mining. They can
be classiﬁed into four types as reviewed in the following.

One main type of these techniques are the aforementioned two-phase approaches, by
which the NRG is determined by a predeﬁned distance threshold. This general frame-
work was ﬁrst proposed by Shekhar et al. [9]. Within the framework, different algo-
rithms such as joinless algorithm [2], synchronic sweep algorithm [10], and density-
based algorithm [3], were proposed to improve the performance of mining process,
especially the efﬁciency of collecting clique instances. For example, Xiao et al. [3]
proposed to search the dense areas with high priorities so as to speed up the decision
making of the algorithm. The approach was also used in spatio-temporal data sets by
introducing a time factor as the time interval threshold [11].

As a distortion of the ﬁrst type of approaches, the second type diversiﬁes the objec-
tive of spatial co-location pattern mining. For example, it was extended to mine com-
plex spatial co-location patterns (e.g., one-to-many, self-colocating, self-exclusive, and
multi-feature exclusive) [12] and maximal co-location patterns [13]. Huang et al. [14]
also adjusted the interest measure to treat the case with rare events. Yoo et al. [15]
proposed to ﬁnd the N -most prevalent co-location patterns.

The third type replaces the usage of distance threshold in the ﬁrst phase. Huang et
al. [16] proposed to use density ratio of different features to describe the neighborhood
relationship together with a clustering algorithm. A buffer-based model [17] was also
proposed to describe the neighborhood relationship for dealing with extended spatial
objects such as lines and polygons. Sheng et al. [18] used the inﬂuence functions to
model the spatial features. Among these work, a similar neighborhood related threshold
or function has to be predeﬁned by users.

These three types of techniques focus on the global co-location patterns. That is,
the ﬁrst and second types adopt a predeﬁned distance threshold to determine the NRG,
while the third type replaces it with a similar neighborhood related threshold. The fourth
type assumes that the neighborhood distances are consistent. The data sets with various
densities are not sophisticatedly treated in these work.

The fourth type of techniques discovers the regional co-location patterns. Celik et
al. [19] straightforwardly applied the conventional approaches to a set of zones, where

Discovery of Regional Co-location Patterns

177

a zonal space has to be speciﬁed by users. Eick et al. [5] adopted the prototype-based
clustering [20] to ﬁnd regional co-location patterns. The interestingness of co-locations
was scored in its ﬁtness function. As an input of this approach, every event has a vector
value of all the features, in which each item needs to be a continuous type. However,
this work did not explore the monotonic property of the interesting measure proposed
by Shekhar et al. [9] which introduces the pruning techniques to the mining process.
Moreover, this approach may not be applicable to the discrete type of inputs.

3 Problem Formulation

In this section, we will present the problem statement after some basic deﬁnitions re-
lated to regional co-location mining.

3.1 Basic Deﬁnitions
A spatial data set is an input of the spatial co-location pattern mining algorithm.
Deﬁnition 1 (Spatial data set). A spatial data set has a set of non-spatial features
F = {f1, f2, . . . , fn}, and consists of a set of spatial events E = {E1, E2, . . . , En},
where Ei (1 (cid:2) i (cid:2) n) is a set of events of feature fi. Every event ej ∈ Ei (1 (cid:2) j (cid:2) |Ei|)
has a vector information of (cid:3)feature type fi, event ID j, spatial location (x, y)(cid:4).
Given the neighborhood constraint, a spatial data set or part of it (one of its regions) can
be converted into an NRG as the foundation for co-location discovery. The conventional
approaches adopt the distance threshold to describe this neighborhood constraint which
may lead to limitations as discussed in Section I. To get rid of those limitations, we
adopt the kNNG to deﬁne the NRG in the following.
Deﬁnition 2 (Neighborhood relationship graph (NRG)). The neighborhood relation-
ship graph G is implemented by kNNG, in which each vertex represents a spatial event,
and there is an edge connecting two vertices if they have different features and either of
them is among the kNNs of the other one. The graph’s vertices and edges are denoted
as V (G) and E(G) = kNNG(V (G)), and each edge is assigned with a weight that is
the Euclidean distance between two spatial events connected by an edge.
In our approach, each NRG corresponds to an individual region. In practice, kNNG
can be calculated by ﬁrstly ﬁnding the kNN of spatial events and then ﬁltering out the
edges whose end points share the same feature type. In the context of NRG represented
by kNNG, the neighborhood distance is the weight of an edge in the graph.

Given the above neighborhood constraint, the interestingness of prevalent co-
locations within a region is deﬁned by an interesting measure known as participation
index which is in turn deﬁned from participation ratio. We borrow the deﬁnitions [1,2]
as follows.
Deﬁnition 3 (Participation ratio). Given the co-location C (C ⊂ F ), its participa-
tion ratio of fi (fi ∈ C) is deﬁned as P r(C, fi) = πfi
, where π is
the relational projection operation with duplication elimination and table instance is
the collection of clique instances of co-locations or features, in each instance of co-
locations the spatial events are neighbors to each other.

(table instance(C))
table instance(fi )

178

F. Qian et al.

Deﬁnition 4 (Participation index). The participation index of co-location C is P i(C)
= minfi∈C{P r(C, fi)}, which measures the prevalence of C.
With a predeﬁned prevalence threshold θ, the second phase of the conventional algo-
rithms such as join [1] or joinless algorithm [2] can wisely discover for each region a
set of co-locations of which the value of participation index is not less than threshold θ
(i.e., P i(C) (cid:3) θ). Moreover, due to the monotonic property of participation index, i.e.,
P i(C(cid:3)) (cid:3) P i(C) ∀ C(cid:3) ⊂ C, pruning techniques such as apriori [21] may be introduced
into the mining process.

As foregoing, we assume that a reasonable region has relatively consistent neigh-
borhood distances, meaning that the edge weights in an NRG have small variation. In
a usual application domain of co-location discovery, geographers and biologists care
about the spatial patterns under speciﬁc spatial frameworks following clumped, ran-
dom or uniform distribution [22]. In clustering applications, classic algorithms (e.g.,
k-means algorithm [20]) often assume that the clumped clusters are compact, imply-
ing that they have consistent neighborhood distances inside. As for the data sets with
random or uniform distribution, the local regions are also reasonable to hold the consis-
tency. Based on the above applications, we deﬁne the distance variation coefﬁcient to
investigate the neighborhood distances of regions as follows.

Deﬁnition 5 (Distance variation coefﬁcient). The distance variation coefﬁcient of the
μ(E(G)) , where μ(·) and σ(·) are statistical operations for
NRG G is deﬁned as Ω(G) = σ(E(G))
calculating the mean value and standard deviation of the weights of all edges in G.
Our mining framework allows us to hierarchically merge regions followed by ﬁnding
their prevalent co-location sets. During the merging process, the range of distance vary-
ing is controlled by a corresponding distance variation threshold . The algorithm does
not stop until the distance variation of every newly merged region is greater than , i.e.,
Ω(G) > .

L(cid:2)

As another assumption w.r.t. spatial heterogeneity, we deﬁne the similarity of regions
in the following. By gradually combining the most similar regions under the distance
variation constraint, our algorithm guarantees the maximum consistency of co-locating
information inside the regions.
Deﬁnition 6 (Similarity of NRGs). Given the prevalence threshold θ and two NRGs
G1 and G2, their similarity is deﬁned as R(G1,G2) = 1L−1
J(C1i,C2i), where C1i is
the set of size i co-locations of G1 each of which is prevalent (i.e., P i(C1i) (cid:3) θ), C2i the
set of size i co-locations of G2 each of which is prevalent (i.e., P i(C2i) (cid:3) θ), J(·) the
|A∪B| , and L the maximum size of the prevalent
Jaccard index deﬁned as J(A, B) = |A∩B|
co-locations of either G1 or G2.
The size of a co-location C is the number of distinct features it contains, namely
|{fi|fi ∈ C}| [1]. We indicate P i(C1i) (cid:3) θ if P i(C) (cid:3) θ ∀ C ⊂ C1i. The Jac-
card index is a statistic commonly used for comparing the similarity of data sets. We
adopt it to investigate the intersection rate of prevalent co-locations between regions.
The similarity function helps us decide the priority of candidates to be merged. Finally,
we give the following deﬁnition to identify the regions with rare events as anomalies.

i=2

179
Deﬁnition 7 (Signiﬁcant NRG). Given a ratio threshold α, an NRG G and its cor-
responding region are signiﬁcant if |V (G)| (cid:3) α|E|, where |E| is the total number of
spatial events.

Discovery of Regional Co-location Patterns

3.2 Problem Statement

With the above deﬁnitions, we give a formal description of regional co-location pattern
discovery in the following.
Given: (1) A spatial data set including a set of features F and a set of their spatial
events E; (2) a prevalence threshold θ; (3) a distance variance threshold ; and (4) a
ratio threshold α.
Find: Regional co-location patterns, i.e., (1) a set of regions Γ = {G1, G2, . . . , Gm}
in which each element is represented as a kNNG, where V (Gi) ⊂ E, E(Gi) =
kNNG(V (Gi)) (1 (cid:2) i (cid:2) m); and (2) a set of prevalent co-locations C for each
region Gi where P i(C) (cid:3) θ.
Constraints: Consistent neighborhood distances and consistent co-locating information
within regions, i.e., (1) Ω(Gi) (cid:2)  and |V (Gi)| (cid:3) α|E| (1 (cid:2) i (cid:2) m); and (2) minimiz-
ing the similarity between adjacent regions R(Gi,Gj ) (1 (cid:2) i, j (cid:2) m).

4 Regional Co-location Mining Algorithm

In the next, we present our algorithm for mining regional co-location patterns. The
algorithm is carried out by three steps as follows. (1) In Step 1, a set of initial regions are
formed by assigning each of them an MkNN edge with k = 1 or a single event that does
not participated in those mutual edges. (2) In Step 2, the algorithm iteratively merges
the similar regions under the constraint of distance variation. Step 2 is achieved by two
sub-steps as follows. (2.1) In Step 2.1, in each iteration, k is increased by one and every
newly generated MkNN edge links two of the current regions which compose a merging
candidate; and (2.2) in Step 2.2, we decreasingly sort the merging candidates by their
similarity values and sequentially merge them if the constraint of distance variation
is satisﬁed. (3) In Step 3, the signiﬁcant regions represented as kNNGs are returned
together with their prevalent co-locations which are discovered by the second phase of
join algorithm [1] in each region.

We illustrate the process of each iteration in Figure 2, in which Figure 2(a) shows
four signiﬁcant regions as indicated by circles each of which has a prevalent co-location
in the (k−1)th iteration, and three MkNN edges found indicated by solid lines in the kth
iteration; and Figure 2(b) shows a new region 5 which is the merge result of regions 1
and 3. Algorithm 1 presents the pseudo code of the mining process.

Step 1. Algorithm 1 ﬁrst initializes the value of k as one, and sets the graph set Γ and
the candidate set S empty (lines 1–2). It then ﬁnds a set of MkNN edges with k = 1,
which are disjoint to each other since any event has at most one mutual neighbor. For
these mutual edges, we also require that the end points of them have distinct feature
types (line 3). Naturally, a part of initial regions are formed by assigning a found edge

180

F. Qian et al.

Region 1

{    ,    }

Region 5

{    ,    }

Region 2

{    ,    }

Region 3
{    ,    }

(a)

Region 4
{    ,    }

Region 2

{    ,    }

Region 4
{    ,    }

(b)

Fig. 2. An example of the mining process in each iteration

//k of kNN
//S is a set of merging candidates
//Nk is a set of MkNN edges of E

//traverse candidates by sorted order
//test merging
//variation not large
//replace G1, G2 with their merged region

k = k + 1;
for each (cid:6)e1,e2 ∈ Nk\Nk−1
if e1 ∈ V (G1) and e2 ∈ V (G2)
then S = S ∪ R(G1,G2);

// increase k by one
//update the mutual k-nn edges
//e1 and e2 are end points of edge (cid:6)
//link two regions
//append to candidate set without duplication

Inputs: A data set including E and F , parameters θ,  and α.
Outputs: A set of kNNGs Γ , a set of corresponding co-locations C.
Method:
1: k = 1;
2: Γ = ∅; S = ∅;
3: Nk = MkNN(E, F, k);
4: Initialize each edge (cid:6) ∈ Nk as an individual graph G in Γ ;
5: Initialize each e ∈ E\V (Nk) as an individual graph G in Γ ;
6: while |{G| G ∈ Γ and V (G) (cid:3) α|E|}| is changed
7:
8: Nk = MkNN(E, F, k);
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
end for
18:
19: end while
20: Calculate co-locations C for each G ∈ Γ with prevalence threshold θ;
21: return Γ & C;

V (G) = V (G1) ∪ V (G2); E(G) = kNNG(V (G));
if Ω(G) (cid:2)  or (V (G1) < α) and (V (G2) < α)
then Γ = ((Γ\G1)\G2) ∪ G

end for
sort S decreasingly by similarity value R;
for each R(G1, G2) ∈ S

//output signiﬁcant regions and their co-locations

Algorithm 1. Discovery of regional co-location patterns

to each of them (line 4); whereas the rest part is formed by assigning each region with
a single event that does not participate in any of those edges (line 5).

Step 2.1. It then starts to merge the current regions iteratively. The process does not
terminate until the signiﬁcant region can be merged, which means that the number of
signiﬁcant regions does not change (line 6). In each iteration, the algorithm increases
k by one and updates the set of MkNN edges (lines 7–8). For each newly generated
edge, a merging candidate is formed if it connects two of the current regions and the
similarity is calculated (lines 9–12).

Step 2.2. Given a set of merging candidates, the algorithm decreasingly sorts them
by their similarity values (line 13), and sequentially investigates each candidate whether

Discovery of Regional Co-location Patterns

181

Fig. 3. An example of regional co-location pattern mining

its two regions have not yet been merged (lines 14–15). Each candidate is investigated
by a test merge and an evaluation of the merged region with the constraint of distance
variation. If the constraint is satisﬁed or both of two regions of the candidates are still
insigniﬁcant, the algorithm replaces them with the newly merged region (lines 16–19).
Step 3. Based on a set of ﬁnal regions, the algorithm calculates a set of co-location
patterns for each of them if it is signiﬁcant with small variation, and uses the second
phase of join algorithm to ﬁnd prevalent co-locations (line 20). Otherwise, the region is
discarded since it has rare events which can be regarded as an anomaly. Finally, a set of
signiﬁcant regions and their prevalent co-location sets are returned to users (line 21).

5 Experimental Evaluation

Based on a real world data set, we evaluate the mining results of our approach against
the conventional ones, and study the trends of several statistics in our mining process.

5.1 Description of Real Data Set

Figure 3(a) shows a real world data set (details shown in Table 1) we use for exper-
iments. It is available at the Digital Chart of the World (DCW) Data Server [23] for
research on spatial co-location discovery (see e.g.,[10,18]). Its spatial events have lo-
cation information of latitudes and longitudes. Moreover, they are classiﬁed by distinct
types of landmarks, such as drainage, land cover, and populated place. It is obvious that
the data set includes various densities. In the data set, the geographic coordinates are
transferred to projection coordinates using Universal Transverse Mercartor projection.

5.2 Mining Results

In this set of experiments, we run both our regional mining algorithm and the join
algorithm on the DCW data set with parameters  = 0.6, θ = 0.6 and α = 0.005.
Figure 3(b) illustrates our mining results (details shown in Table 2) for the data set
shown in Figure 3(a), in which we identify nine regions and some regional co-locations.

182

F. Qian et al.

Table 1. The data set of US Minnesota state in DCW

Landmark Type

Aeronautical Point
Cultural Landmark

abbr. # of events
abbr. # of events No.
No.
5
Ap
Hy
1
6 Hypsography Supplemental Hs
Cl
2
Lc
7
3
Dr
4 Drainage Supplemental Ds
8
Pp

Landmark Type
Hypsography

72
687
28
517

Populated Place

86
103
6

Land Cover

Drainage

1338

Table 2. Information of found regions in DCW data set

Regions

R3
866
Average neighborhood 10.54 8.12 16.74

Number of events

R1
15

R2
14

R4
430
22.19

R5
727
24.91

R6
128
3.63

R7
94
3.49

R8
96
2.78

R9
157
4.22

distance (km)

Distance variation

0.60
Number of co-locations 3, 1, 0 1, 0, 0 3, 1, 0 10, 10, 3 7, 3, 0 15, 13, 4 8, 3, 0 10, 5, 1 9, 2, 0

0.51

0.60

0.40

0.58

0.55

0.59

0.57

0.60

(sizes 2, 3, and 4)

Table 3. Value of participation index of co-locations in DCW data set

Algorithms P i({Ds,Hs,Pp}) P i({Ap,Ds,Pp}) P i({Hs,Cl,Pp}) P i({Ap,Cl,Pp})
join(30km)
join(35km)
join(40km)

Null
Null
Null

Null
0.70
0.78

Null
Null
0.64

0.65
0.72
0.77

RCMA

0.98(R3),0.96(R4) 0.66(R5),0.71(R6)
0.69(R5),0.90(R6) 0.86(R8),0.75(R9)

0.71(R4)
0.90(R5)

0.81(R6)

Fig. 4. Impact of k values to (a) the number of regions, and (b) the number of signiﬁcant regions

In Table 3, we select four co-locations to demonstrate the difference between these
two algorithms. The join algorithm discovers only the co-location {Ds, Hs, Pp} with
a small distance threshold (30km). When the value of distance threshold increases, the
other two co-locations ({Ap, Ds, Pp} and {Hs, Cl, Pp}) are detected. However, these
regional co-locations are over-estimated to be globally prevalent. By contrast, our al-
gorithm can detect them in their corresponding regions. We also ﬁnd the co-location

Discovery of Regional Co-location Patterns

183

Fig. 5. Impact of k values to (a) the average similarity of adjacent regions, and (b) the average
distance variation
{Ap, Cl, Pp} in a single region which is under-estimated by the conventional ap-
proaches. By comparing with the previous research results [18], our mining results
include their discovered co-locations, and can assign them to the corresponding regions.

5.3 Evaluation of Regional Mining Process

In what follows, we study the trends of four statistics in our mining process on the
DCW data set with the information of the number of regions, the number of signiﬁcant
regions, the average similarity of adjacent regions and the average distance variation.

Number of Regions. As can be seen from Figure 4(a), the number of regions decreases
with the increase of k value. This is because the small regions are merged into larger
ones. The decreasing is fast when k is small, while most of the regions are insigniﬁcant
and the merging condition is easy to satisfy. The fast rate of decreasing also indicates
that a relatively small k value can sufﬁciently describe the neighborhood relationship
of spatial events, as well as the regional structure of space.

Number of Signiﬁcant Regions. At the initial stage of mining process, there are hardly
any signiﬁcant regions as illustrated in Figure 4(b). Then the number of signiﬁcant re-
gions increases in a sudden when k = 6. This is because many insigniﬁcant regions
are closing to the ratio line and become signiﬁcant. The remaining set of insigniﬁcant
regions naturally become anomalies which are hard to merge due to different neighbor-
hood distance from their adjacent regions. After that, the number of signiﬁcant regions
decreases when the similar regions are sequentially merged.

Average Similarity of Adjacent Regions. To determine whether two regions are adja-
cent, we calculate each region a minimum bounding rectangle (MBR) and extend its
width and height by 10%. Two regions are regarded as adjacent if they have an overlap
between their MBRs. According to Deﬁnition 6, we calculate the average similarity of
adjacent regions as shown in Figure 5(a). At the beginning of the process the similar-
ity ﬂuctuates, and then decreases rapidly. To explain the ﬂuctuation, we tentatively test
the relationship of k and the distance variation in Figure 6. We continually generate a
set of kNNGs of the DCW data set by increasing k value from one to larger values,
then calculate the value of distance variation for each generated graph. As can be con-
cluded, the distance variation of the graph is large with small k. It decreases as k value

184

F. Qian et al.

Fig. 6. Impact of k values to the distance variation of kNNG

increases. This is because small value of k indicates a large gap of the neighborhood
distance between the events in dense and sparse areas. When k becomes larger, the
edges with larger weights are involved and reduce the gap. Thus, at the beginning of
the merging process, the regions which have different neighborhood distance are not
merged even if they have consistent co-locating information. With larger k values, the
distance variation of regions becomes smaller, while the consistency of co-locating in-
formation generally becomes a primary reference for merging. This explains the early
ﬂuctuation because the impact of distance variation and co-locating information match
each other, and the later on drop of the similarity because the co-locating information
competes as the primary reference.

Average Distance Variation. Figure 5(b) shows the implication between the average
distance variation of regions and k values. With slight ﬂuctuation, the average distance
variation generally becomes large. The trend of curve veriﬁes our explanation that the
impact of distance variation and co-locating information match each other at the initial
stage, and then the latter becomes the primary reference for merging.

6 Conclusion

We have discussed the limitations of conventional approaches to mining spatial co-
locations using distance thresholds, especially for data sets with various magnitudes of
neighborhood distances. To get rid of those limitations, we have proposed a hierarchi-
cal mining framework to discover regional co-locations accounting for both varieties of
neighborhood distances and spatial heterogeneity. By adopting kNNG instead of dis-
tance thresholds, we have proposed a novel “distance variation coefﬁcient” to drive the
mining process and determine an individual NRG for each region. With rigorous ex-
periments on a real world data set, we have demonstrated that our framework has been
effective for the discovery of regional co-location patterns.

Acknowledgement. This work is partly supported by National Key Technologies R&D
Program of China under Grant No. 2011BAD21B02 and MOE-Intel IT Research Fund
of China under Grant No. MOE-INTEL-11-06, in which Chiew’s work is partly sup-
ported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61272303.

Discovery of Regional Co-location Patterns

185

References

1. Huang, Y., Shekhar, S., Xiong, H.: Discovering colocation patterns from spatial datasets:
A general approach. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 16(12),
1472–1485 (2004)

2. Yoo, J.S., Shekhar, S.: A joinless approach for mining spatial colocation patterns. IEEE

Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 18(10), 1323–1337 (2006)

3. Xiao, X., Xie, X., Luo, Q., Ma, W.Y.: Density based co-location pattern discovery. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 16th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geo-
graphic Information Systems, Irvine, USA, November 5-7, pp. 1–10 (2008)

4. Miller, H.J., Han, J.: Geographic Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. CRC Press, New

York (2009)

5. Eick, C.F., Parmar, R., Ding, W., Stepinski, T.F., Nicot, J.P.: Finding regional co-location
patterns for sets of continuous variables in spatial datasets. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM
SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems,
Irvine, USA, November 5-7, pp. 30:1–30:10 (2008)

6. Karypis, G., Han, E.H., Kumar, V.: CHAMELEON: Hierarchical clustering using dynamic

modeling. IEEE Computer 32(8), 68–75 (1999)

7. Brito, M.R., Chavez, E.L., Quiroz, A.J., Yukich, J.E.: Connectivity of the mutual k-nearest-
neighbor graph in clustering and outlier detection. Statistics & Probability Letters 35(1),
33–42 (1997)

8. Ding, C., He, X.: K-nearest-neighbor consistency in data clustering: incorporating local in-
formation into global optimization. In: Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing, Nicosia, Cyprus, March 14-17, pp. 584–589 (2004)

9. Shekhar, S., Huang, Y.: Discovering spatial co-location patterns: A summary of results. In:
Jensen, C.S., Schneider, M., Seeger, B., Tsotras, V.J. (eds.) SSTD 2001. LNCS, vol. 2121,
pp. 236–256. Springer, Heidelberg (2001)

10. Zhang, X., Mamoulis, N., Cheung, D.W., Shou, Y.: Fast mining of spatial collocations. In:
Proceedings of the Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, Seattle, USA, August 22-25, pp. 384–393 (2004)

11. Yoo, J.S., Shekhar, S., Kim, S., Celik, M.: Discovery of co-evolving spatial event sets. In:
Proceedings of the 6th SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, Bethesda, USA,
November 20-22, pp. 306–315 (2006)

12. Munro, R., Chawla, S., Sun, P.: Complex spatial relationships. In: Proceedings of the 3rd
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, Melbourne, USA, December 19-22, pp.
227–234 (2003)

13. Wang, L., Zhou, L., Lu, J., Yip, J.: An order-clique-based approach for mining maximal

co-locations. Information Sciences 179(19), 3370–3382 (2009)

14. Huang, Y., Pei, J., Xiong, H.: Mining co-Location patterns with rare events from spatial data

sets. GeoInformatica 10(3), 239–260 (2006)

15. Yoo, J.S., Bow, M.: Mining spatial colocation patterns: a different framework. Data Mining

and Knowledge Discovery 24(1), 159–194 (2012)

16. Huang, Y., Zhang, P., Zhang, C.: On the relationships between clustering and spatial co-
location pattern mining. International Journal on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Tools 17(1), 55–70
(2008)

17. Xiong, H., Shekhar, S., Huang, Y., Kumar, V., Ma, X., Yoo, J.S.: A framework for discovering
co-location patterns in data sets with extended spatial objects. In: Proceedings of the Fourth
SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, Lake Buena, USA, April 22-24, vol. 89,
pp. 78–89 (2004)

186

F. Qian et al.

18. Sheng, C., Hsu, W., Li Lee, M., Tung, A.K.H.: Discovering spatial interaction patterns. In:
Haritsa, J.R., Kotagiri, R., Pudi, V. (eds.) DASFAA 2008. LNCS, vol. 4947, pp. 95–109.
Springer, Heidelberg (2008)

19. Celik, M., Kang, J.M., Shekhar, S.: Zonal co-location pattern discovery with dynamic pa-
rameters. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, Omaha, USA,
October 28-31, pp. 433–438 (2007)

20. Wu, X., Kumar, V., Quinlan, J.R., Ghosh, J., Yang, Q., Motoda, H., McLachlan, G., Ng, A.,
Liu, B., Yu, P., Zhou, Z., Steinbach, M., Hand, D., Steinberg, D.: Top 10 algorithms in data
mining. Knowledge and Information Systems 14(1), 1–37 (2008)

21. Agrawal, R., Srikant, R.: Fast algorithms for mining association rules. In: Proceedings of the
20th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, Santiago de Chile, Chile, Septem-
ber 12-15, pp. 487–499 (1994)

22. Wang, J.: Spatial Analysis. Science Press, Beijing (2006)
23. Digital Chart of the World (2010), http://www.maproom.psu.edu/dcw/


