Inferring Metapopulation Based Disease

Transmission Networks

Xiaofei Yang1, Jiming Liu1,

William Kwok Wai Cheung1, and Xiao-Nong Zhou2

1 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University

{xfyang09,jiming,william}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Hong Kong SAR, China

2 National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, China CDC, Shanghai, China

zhouxn1@chinacdc.cn

Abstract. To investigate how an infectious disease spreads, it is most
desirable to discover the underlying disease transmission networks based
on surveillance data. Existing studies have provided some methods for
inferring information diﬀusion networks, where nodes correspond to indi-
vidual persons. However, in the case of disease transmission, to eﬀectively
develop intervention strategies, it would be more realistic and reasonable
for policy makers to study the diﬀusion patterns at the metapopulation
level, that is, to consider disease transmission networks where nodes rep-
resent subpopulations, and links indicate their interrelationships. Such
networks are useful to: (i) investigate hidden factors that inﬂuence epi-
demic dynamics, (ii) reveal possible sources of epidemic outbreaks, and
(iii) practically develop and improve strategies for disease control. There-
fore, based on such a real-world motivation, we aim to address the prob-
lem of inferring disease transmission networks at the metapopulation
level. Speciﬁcally, we propose an inference method called NetEpi (Net-
work Epidemic), and evaluate the method by utilizing synthetic and
real-world datasets. The experiments show that NetEpi can recover most
of the ground-truth disease transmission networks based only on the
surveillance data. Moreover, it can help detect and interpret patterns
and transmission pathways from the real-world data.

Keywords: Network inference, disease transmission networks, metapop-
ulation, Bayesian learning, partial correlation networks.

1

Introduction

Infectious disease transmission has been studied with a network based approach
and at an individual level [1]. However, existing studies often assume network
structures are given in advance (e.g., air travels for the spread of H1N1 [2]),
suggesting that it is possible to know which individual could be infected next. In
reality, what is possible to observe is only the spatiotemporal surveillance data,
containing infection times and locations of reported infection cases. This data

V.S. Tseng et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2014, Part II, LNAI 8444, pp. 385–399, 2014.
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014

386

X. Yang et al.

provides no knowledge of the hidden transmission pathways that denote the
routes of disease propagation among geographical locations. This real-world sit-
uation directly poses a signiﬁcant challenge to the policy makers in applying
intervention strategies at appropriate times and locations. In this regard, infer-
ring disease transmission networks (DTNs) becomes an important and urgent
research problem in epidemiological studies, which is our key objective.

The network inference problem has been widely studied in the information
diﬀusion domain and is usually conducted at an individual level. Based on em-
pirical time-series data of when people get informed, the static network inference
is transformed into a combinatorial optimization problem [3]. Formulating it as
a MAX-k -COVER problem, Rodriguez et al. have proven that selecting the top
k edges that maximize the likelihood of the static information diﬀusion net-
work (IDN) structure is NP-hard. They introduced a greedy algorithm based on
the submodularity properties to approximate the optimal solution. Myers and
Leskovec formulated a similar problem with heterogeneous edge weights into a
convex optimization problem, and proposed a maximum likelihood method to
solve it [4]. In addition, having noticed that the structure of a social network is
sparse, they introduced penalty functions into the objective function to improve
the accuracy. In a recently published study on inferring DTNs at the individual
level [5], Teunis and Heijne used a pairwise kernel likelihood function to incor-
porate disease related information, and trained and applied the model using a
real-world dataset collected from a university hospital.

The above work has provided insights into solving network inference problems
at an individual level. However, inferring DTNs is more meaningful and prac-
tical at a metapopulation level, where nodes and edges represent patches with
subpopulations (e.g., cities) and transmission pathways among them (e.g., trans-
portation) rather than individual persons and their pairwise connections (e.g.,
social contacts). This is due to the considerations of: (i) the appropriateness of
simulating disease transmission in both spatial and temporal scales [6], (ii) diﬃ-
culties in simulating complicated human behaviors and collecting a huge amount
of personal information [1], and (iii) the practice of controlling disease transmis-
sion from the view point of policy makers [7]. However, this treatment leads
to two additional challenges: (i) nodes within metapopulation based DTNs can
in addition connect to themselves, indicating susceptible people get infected by
infected people within the same subpopulation, and (ii) metapopulation based
disease transmission follows Directed Cyclic Graphs (DCGs) rather than Di-
rected Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) as in information diﬀusion or individual based
DTNs. Even if a large proportion of a certain subpopulation is infected, the
remaining susceptible persons that have not been temporally infected will still
have chances of being infected later.

Inferring metapopulation based DTNs is not only desirable but also challeng-
ing. As far as we know, there has not been such work done before. In this paper,
we will address this problem, and more speciﬁcally, make three contributions:
(i) to build a generalized linear disease transmission model that considers all
possible transmission pathways at the metapopulation level, (ii) to develop an

Inferring Metapopulation Based Disease Transmission Networks

387

inference method, called NetEpi, that infers hidden DTNs based only on the spa-
tiotemporal surveillance data, and (iii) to solve the network inference problem
over DCGs rather than DAGs. We believe such work is also practically mean-
ingful since it helps computationally predict large-scale infectious disease spread
and provide policy makers with insights into optimizing intervention strategies.
The paper is organized as follows. The metapopulation based DTN inference
problem is formulated in Section 2. A two-step inference method (NetEpi) is
introduced in Section 3. NetEpi is evaluated by using both synthetic and real-
world datasets in Section 4. Finally, we make conclusions in Section 5.

2 Problem Statement

A ground-truth DTN is deﬁned as G = <V, E>, where the set of nodes is denoted
as V = {vi | i = 0, 1, 2, ..., N}. i is the index of a speciﬁc node. v0 represents

the external source node for the imported cases that would potentially cause
local epidemics [8] (Imported cases are the laboratory-conﬁrmed infection cases
where people have traveled to disease endemic regions within days before the
onset of the disease [8]). vi (i = 1, 2, ..., N ) correspond to the rest of nodes
within the target region. E = {ei | i = 1, 2, ..., N} denotes the set of edges with
weights W = {wi | i = 1, 2, ..., N}. ei is the set of incoming links for node i, and
wi is the corresponding weight vector. Source node v0 has no incoming links.
The physical meanings of these edges that have non-zero weights describe the
generalized transmission pathways that temporally correlate subpopulations in
terms of their infection observations. In reality, G cannot be directly obtained.
What is often collected is surveillance data, which can be represented as D =
{<vi, ici, ti> | i = 0, 1, 2, ..., N, t ∈ T} after aggregating infection cases based
on locations and infection times. vi corresponds to a geographical location (e.g.,
a city, or a township), ici is the aggregated number of infection cases, and ti
indicates a time step. T is the considered time period of disease transmission.

We refer to the estimated DTN as G∗

, and consider three types of transmis-
sion pathways: (i) internal transmission component (ITC), which indicates that
infected people, directly (e.g., in the air-borne disease of inﬂuenza) or indirectly
(e.g., in the vector-borne disease of malaria), infect susceptible people within the
same subpopulation, (ii) neighborhood transmission component (NTC), where
disease transmits, through physically connected highways, adjacent borders, etc.,
among several subpopulations (it signiﬁes the interactions happening between
infected people in diﬀerent subpopulations), and (iii) external inﬂuence compo-
nent (EIC), which represents the source of imported cases from distant endemic
regions or countries. In G, it is an external node connected to all the other nodes.
To characterize a disease transmission process over G, we integrate both of
the internal transmission component and the external inﬂuence component with
the neighborhood transmission component. The total number of infection cases

388

X. Yang et al.

can be written as a linear combination of the above three components plus an
error term ε that captures the unpredicted biases, as follows:

ici

t + ntci

t =itci
=wii × ici

t−1 +

t + eici
Ni(cid:2)

t + ε
wji × icj

t−1 + w0i × ic0

t−1 + ε

(1)

j

t, ntci

t, and eici

t refer to the numbers of infection cases from ITC,
where itci
NTC, and EIC to node i (i (cid:3)= 0) at time step t, respectively. Ni is the number of
the neighbors of node i. The error term ε follows a zero-mean normal distribution,
ε ∼ N (0, β). Eq. 1 characterizes the temporal dynamics of infection cases at
each location. To be noticed, in the real world, once a patient is diagnosed to
be infected, treatments and interventions (e.g., medication and isolation) would
be taken by the physicians or hospitals. Thus, the infection cases at the current
time step would be set to be isolated in the following time steps.
Given an observed surveillance dataset D = {<vi, ici, ti> | i = 0, 1, 2, ..., N, t ∈
T}, we intend to infer E of G and their corresponding weights W . The likelihood
function for a speciﬁc node i based on Eq. 1 is:

L(wi, β|ici) =

T(cid:3)

t=1

1

(2πβ)(1/2)

e

− 1

2β (ict

i−wii×ic

i −N∗

t−1

i(cid:2)

j

wji×icj

t−1−w0i×ic0

t−1)

(2)

∗
i

indicates the number of the estimated neighbors of node i within G∗
i = {vj | j = 0, 1, 2, ..., N and wji (cid:3)= 0}.
∗

where N
This set of neighbors can be written as V
β is the variance of the normal distribution for ε. Therefore, we transform the
network inference problem into an optimization problem, which is to ﬁnd an
optimal combination of neighbors with accurate weights for a speciﬁc node i.
Speciﬁcally, to infer network G∗
, we aim to maximize the likelihood function,
given as:

.

L(W, β|D) =

L(wi, β|ici)

(3)

N(cid:3)

i=1

3 The Proposed Network Inference Method

3.1 Partial Correlation Network Construction

Given D, we ﬁrst hope to construct an approximate network structure. It will
reduce the trivial computations for our second step as well as ﬁlter out a propor-
tion of false positive edges. Using the pearson correlation to build such networks
is intuitive but not workable in the case of disease transmission. As shown in
Fig. 1(a), disease transmission may follow a path from i to k, then to j. Even
though i and j are not directly connected, they may still be correlated. Therefore,
in the approximate network structure, denoted as Gp, they may be connected

Inferring Metapopulation Based Disease Transmission Networks

389

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. Possible transmission relationships among three nodes [9]. Blue nodes are the
targets of correlation analysis. The red one is the intermediate node. (a) shows that
there is no directed edge between nodes i and j. Disease transmission follows a path
from node i to k, then to j. (b) shows node k transmits to nodes i and j simultaneously
and independently. (c) shows the pearson correlation results for (a) and (b).

as illustrated in Fig. 1(c). The same problem also exists in the case of Fig. 1(b),
where i and j are the children of k considering the disease transmission dynamics.
To avoid such situations, we carry out ﬁrst-order partial correlation analysis,
which measures the dependence between two variables, while removing or ﬁxing
a third variable. In this regard, to compute it between nodes i and j, we remove
or ﬁx the impact of another node k, where k = 0, 1, 2, ..., N and k (cid:3)= i, j. From the
results, we choose coeﬃcients that indicate strong correlations with signiﬁcant
p-values. It should be mentioned that partial correlation usually does not provide
edge directions [10]. Therefore, to infer directed edges, we analyze the time-series
data with a time lag (e.g., one day or one week). Then, the direction is from
the node using the previous time-series data to the node using the current one.
The partial correlation coeﬃcient between nodes i and j after ﬁxing the variable
jk), where ρij , ρik, and ρjk
are the covariances. This method removes many false positive edges as well as
generates an approximate partial correlation network (PCN), Gp.

(cid:4)
of node k is ρij.k = (ρij − ρikρjk)(

1 − ρ2

(cid:5)

1 − ρ2

ik

3.2 Back-Tracking Bayesian Learning

It should be noted that some edges in Gp still do not exist in G. A possible
solution is to set the weights of these false positive edges with values of zero
during the inference process. This is similar to the removal of irrelevant basis
components as in basis pursuit for dimensionality reduction [11]. In our proposed
inference method, we base our second step on the Sparse Bayesian Learning
(SBL) framework [12]. To be noticed, if two components are similar, SBL only
chooses one of them in order to compress the relevant information. However, in
our case, even two nodes are similar, we aim to ﬁnd both of them.

For node i, we divide preprocessed surveillance dataset D into two subsets: an

M × 1 vector of y = {<vi, ici, ti> | ti = 2, 3, ..., M + 1, M ∈ T} and an M ×|N p|
matrix of x = {<vj, icj, tj> | j ∈ N p, tj = 1, 2, ..., M, M ∈ T − 1}. M is the
size of output variable y and input variable x. N p represents the indices of the
possible neighbors that node i has based on Gp. T −1 is the previously considered
time period of disease transmission. For the sake of presentation, in the following,

390

X. Yang et al.

we omit the index i for y, x, and other parameters. If not speciﬁcally stated, all
the parameters are formulated for node i. Here, we use a time lag of 1 between
y and x. The relationship between y and x can be formulated based on the
generalized linear transmission model introduced in Section 2 as follows:

y = xwT + ε

(4)

where w = {wj | j ∈ N p} is a vector indicating all possible incoming links
estimated based on Gp. ε is an error term. Under the framework of SBL, both
w and ε follow a zero-mean Gaussian distribution with variances of α and β,
(cid:6)
j=1 N (wi|0, α
respectively. They are deﬁned respectively as: p(w|α) =
−1
j ) and
p(ε) = N (0, β). Because we have no prior knowledge about w and ε, it is reason-
able to set them with non-informative prior distributions (e.g., Gamma distri-
bution). α and β are assumed to have the same hyperparameters for all nodes.
Given the observation data of y and the prior distribution of α and β, the

N p

posterior distribution of w is:

p(w|y, α, β) =

likelihood × prior
normalize f actor

p(y|w, β)p(w|α)

p(y|α, β)

=

(5)

−1ΣxT y, Σ = (Λ +
which is a Gaussian distribution N (μ, Σ) with μ = β
−1 where Λ = diag(α1, α2, ..., αN p ). “type-II maximization likelihood”
−1xT x)
β
maximization combined with a maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) esti-
mate transforms the whole problem into that of maximizing the marginal likeli-
hood function of:

(cid:7)

p(y|α, β) =

p(y|w, β)p(w|α)dw

Writing Eq. 6 into a logarithm form L(α), we have:

(cid:7)

L(α) = log p(y|α, β) = log

p(y|w, β)p(w|α)dw

with C = βI + xΛ

[M log 2π + log |C| + yT C−1y]

= − 1
2
−1xT . The derivatives with respect to αj and β are [13]:

∂L(α)
∂ log αj

(1 − αj Σjj − αjμ2
j )

=

1
2

∂L(α)
∂ log β

=

1
2

[

M
β

− (cid:5)y − xμ(cid:5)2 − trace(ΣxT x)]

Setting Eqs. 8 and 9 to zero, the estimations of αj and β become:

j =

αnew
M − (cid:8)

1 − αjΣjj

μ2
j
j=1(1 − αjΣjj )
(cid:5)y − xμ(cid:5)2

βnew =

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

Inferring Metapopulation Based Disease Transmission Networks

391

The above iterative estimation procedure is solved by using the Expectation-
Maximization algorithm. In each iteration, we estimate the contributions to the
marginal likelihood function for all nodes in Gp. The one with maximum con-
tribution is selected as the candidate neighbor. Then, its corresponding weight
is computed. As to be noted, in G, we only have positive links. However, the
prior distribution may cause w to become negative. To avoid this, a constraint
of limiting w to be positive is introduced. To incorporate this constraint, we
use a back-tracking technique. During the EM learning procedure, the update of
marginal likelihood function and other parameters proceeds sequentially. Con-
sequently, each time μ, Σ, αj, and β are updated, we select those αj that fail
the constraint, and put their corresponding indices into a blacklist. The program
is rolled back to the previous step and proceeds by selecting nodes that do not
exist in the blacklist. The algorithm is shown in Alg. 1.

Algorithm 1. Back-Tracking Bayesian Learning

Require: D: Preprocessed surveillance dataset; Gp: Partial correlation network;
Ensure: G∗

: Inferred disease transmission network;

Initialize parameters for prior distributions;
Construct marginal likelihood function pi(y|α, β) (shown in Eq. 6);

for all node j ∈ N p, and i (cid:3)= j do

Compute contributions to pi(y|α, β);

end for
Select node with maximum contribution;
Re-estimate all weights of current neighbors of node i;
if all weights are not less than zero then

1. Divide D into two subsets with time lag of one time unit;
2. for all node i = 1, 2, ..., N do
3.
4.
5. while not reaching stopping criteria do
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18. end for
19. Combine all neighborhood lists to construct G∗
20. return G∗

Update neighborhood list;

;

Remove neighbors with weights less than zero, and put them into blacklist;
Roll back pi(y|α, β);

else

end if

end while

;

3.3 Discussions

As stated in [3], it is not trivial nor practical to ﬁnd all the edges within G,
or the exact time required to stop the inference program. Thus, once the pro-
gram iterates to the maximum permitted iteration steps, or the update of the
marginal likelihood function converges to a small value, we will stop the learning
procedure. To compute the PCN, the time complexity is O(N 3). To speed up this

392

X. Yang et al.

process, we use dynamic programming to recursively compute the ﬁrst-order par-
tial correlation based on the result of zeroth-order partial correlation. As for the
back-tracking Bayesian learning, the complexity of Bayesian learning is mainly
distributed over the computation of parameters of Σ, which requires O(N 3). An
eﬃcient incremental algorithm proposed in [12] can optimize this computation.
Besides, the computation based on Gp can also reduce this computational time.
After integrating the back-tracking algorithm, the time complexity becomes ex-
ponential. However, based on our experiments, the algorithm usually converges
fast. That is to say, the algorithm seldom tracks back to the nodes that are
selected at the very beginning. This is caused by the previous Bayesian learning;
it selects those signiﬁcantly contributing nodes at the very beginning, making
the marginal likelihood function converge to a near optimum solution without
large space to increase, and stable until reaching the stopping criteria.

4 Experiments

4.1 Experiments Based on Synthetic Data

The synthetic data generation proceeds as follows: we ﬁrst use Kronecker Graphs
model [14] to generate a basic network structure. Then, we link all the nodes
with an external node v0, and generate self-connected edges with predeﬁned
probabilities. We iteratively run the transmission model, as given in Eq. 1, for a
suﬃcient number of time steps to generate the disease surveillance data.

Experimental Setting. We construct 3 types of network structures: (i) core-
periphery networks (CPNs), which have a cluster of nodes in the core of the
network, (ii) hierarchical community networks (HCNs), where a proportion of
the nodes form several small communities, and (iii) random graphs (RGs), which
have no obvious pattern. Then, for each structure, we generate networks with
diﬀerent sizes: 64n with 100e, 150e (“n”and “e” are the abbreviations of “nodes”
and “edges”, respectively); 128n with 180e, 200e; 256n with 350e, 400e; 512n with
720e, 800e. For each of them 10 datasets are produced. Speciﬁcally within each
generation process, we make sure that the transmission process cover all the
edges in G. In total, there are 3 types of network topologies × 8 diﬀerent sizes
× 10 independent transmission processes = 240 datasets.

The Baseline Method. To our best knowledge, there have not been much
prior work on inferring network structures over DCGs. Therefore, we utilize a
probability based baseline method. At two adjacent time steps t = n and t = n+
1, all the nodes that have infection cases at t = n will have connections to those
nodes have infection cases at n + 1. The edge weight is aﬀected by the number of
infection cases and the number of infected nodes at the previous time step. We
select the top k edges with the highest weights, and form the estimated disease
transmission network G∗
accordingly. The mathematical formula to compute the
baseline edge weight is wij = ici

t+1/

ticj

(cid:8)

N
i=1 ici

t.

Inferring Metapopulation Based Disease Transmission Networks

393

(a) CPN - 128n, 180e

(b) HCN - 128n, 180e

(c) RG - 128n, 180e

(d) CPN - 256n, 350e

(e) HCN - 256n, 350e

(f) RG - 256n, 350e

Fig. 2. The precision-recall curves for synthetic DTNs. It is obvious that NetEpi out-
performs the baseline method in all cases. The average degree for the above six networks
are 1.3876, 1.4496, 1.4651, 1.3619, 1.5175, and 1.5097, respectively, from (a) to (f).

∗
ij

Result Evaluation. To evaluate the inference results, we compute the precision-
recall curves as shown in Fig. 2. For the sake of space, we display only part of our
experimental results here. The precision and recall are deﬁned as “what fraction
of edges in G∗
is also present in G”, and “what fraction of edges of G appears
in G∗
”, respectively [3]. For nodes i and j, if both ground-truth edge eij and
∗
inferred edge e
ij exist, and the diﬀerence between the corresponding weights
|wij − w
| is less than a threshold, then we say the inferred edge is accurate.
In our experiments, NetEpi outperforms the baseline method in all 240
datasets. Speciﬁcally, for networks that have the same sizes but diﬀerent topolo-
gies, NetEpi performs the best on the CPNs. Nodes located in the core re-
gion have more connections as compared with those in the periphery region.
Therefore, to achieve an optimal solution, core-located nodes will have higher
probabilities to possess a more number of combinations of neighbors. In other
words, the probabilities to ﬁnd a globally optimal solution for a single node
will decrease as the number of its incoming edges increases. The accuracies of
NetEpi over CPNs are consequently biased by the tradeoﬀ between core-located
and periphery-located nodes. In comparison, for HCNs, there is no longer a
single core. In contrast, there are several sub-cores that individually form a sub-
community. This structure makes the average number of combinations for each

394

X. Yang et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. (a) As the GTN size increases, the accuracy of NetEpi decreases. The number
of false edges increases as well. (b) NetEpi accurately captures the disease transmission
trend.

node increase and directly aﬀect the inference accuracy. As for RGs, the number
of connections for each node does not have a ﬁxed pattern, and NetEpi achieves
oscillating results. Here, we use an average out-degree distribution to illustrate
the accuracy diﬀerences between networks with distinct topologies. It is deﬁned
N
i=1 di/N where di is the out degree for node i, davg is the average
as davg =
degree for the whole network. Our analysis results of the 24 synthetic networks
show that the average degrees for CPNs are always smaller than those for HCNs.
And, the average degrees for RGs present oscillating patterns (Fig. 2).

(cid:8)

For networks with the same topologies but diﬀerent sizes, NetEpi achieves
better results on inferring smaller ones as shown in Fig. 2. During the infer-
ence process, the whole Ground-Truth Network (GTN) is treated as a complete
network. Even given the approximate structure Gp, the complexity quadrati-
cally increases as the number of nodes increases. Meanwhile, as the edge number
increases, the number of combinations of neighbors for each node to achieve op-
timal solutions increases as well, which directly interferes the inference results as
in Fig. 3(a). However, the network sizes of metapopulation based DTNs are usu-
ally small at the administrative level. For example, for a global epidemic disease,
WHO publishes statistical reports at the country level. Therefore, a possible so-
lution to infer large-size networks is to perform hierarchical clustering based
on geographical information. NetEpi is conducted from the highest level where
each node represents a cluster of lower-level nodes. Then, within each high-level
node, NetEpi is performed again to infer lower-level transmission networks. This
process is repeatedly and sequentially conduced in order to get a whole picture
of large-size networks. Fig. 3(b) shows an example of the prediction results of
NetEpi. It is obvious that the predicted epidemic trend happening in the GTN
is well captured by the inferred network. This validates that NetEpi converges
to an optimal solution, although this may not be the global one.

Inferring Metapopulation Based Disease Transmission Networks

395

River

Border

River

Fig. 4. Townships that form a community in the inferred malaria transmission network

4.2 Experiments Based on a Real-World Dataset

Experimental Setting. The real-world dataset was provided by Chinese Cen-
ter for Disease Control and Prevention. It contains reported malaria cases in
Yunnan province, China. In total, there are 2928 cases reported in 51 townships
in 2005. These townships are distributed along the border between China and
Myanmar (a high malaria-endemic country) and classiﬁed into 5 categories based
on the numbers of infection cases: (200, +∞) (red), (150, 200] (purple), (100, 150]
(green), (50, 100] (yellow), and (0, 50] (blue). The dataset is very sparse, with
missing data. Moreover, there is no complete information about the sources
and identiﬁcations of imported cases. Thus, a ﬁxed external node cannot be set
up before the inference procedure. Like the periodical pattern of the Internal
Transmission Component, the External Inﬂuence Component also presents reg-
ular pattern because of the frequent human mobility motivated by cross-border
trade and business. We consequently merge EIC with ITC, and represent either of
them, or their combination, by self-connected edges. This is reasonable because
it has been recorded that most of these imported cases were due to working,
trading, and/or visiting in/with Myanmar regularly. Therefore, self-connected
edges are able to capture these regular patterns. We are informed that there
exist imported cases, and expect that the inferred malaria transmission network
contain many self-connected edges. It has been widely reported that the incuba-
tion time for Plasmodium vivax is 12 ∼ 17 days [15]. However, studies have also
reported that the incubation time could be longer from several months to sev-
eral years [15]. Therefore, we choose 21 days as the time window when inferring

396

X. Yang et al.

(a) Township 4

(b) Township 6

(c) Township 8

(d) Township 14

(e) Township 18

(f) Township 28

Fig. 5. The reported cases for the selected nodes in 2005. In order to present them
clearly, we aggregate the reported cases on an eight-day basis.

the underlying malaria transmission network, so that it compromises both the
reported incubation time and the sensitivity analysis that we have conducted
previously.

Result Interpretation. The inferred network contains two classes of nodes.
Some of them connect to themselves as we expected, while the others form
communities. Self-connected nodes occupy 50.98% of the whole network. This
caters to our previous expectation. These nodes are located adjacent to the
border between China and Myanmar, or connected with the border by highways,
or situated close to rivers, which provide suitable environments for the vectors of
malaria to reproduce. Therefore, the malaria endemic within these self-connected
nodes are possibly caused by EIC, ITC, or their combinations.

As shown in Fig. 4, there is a community found in the inferred network. It
contains most nodes that have severe endemic situations. Many townships are
distributed along two rivers. Besides providing suitable habitat there, rivers also
bring the larva of vectors from the upstream to the downstream. Therefore, the
inferred edges of these nodes possibly represent partial inﬂuences from rivers,
and impact of vectors’ movements. In addition, the severest township 6 has con-
nections to all the other second level severity townships (green nodes), indicating
that their disease transmission interactions may be the dominant reason for the
local malaria endemic in the region. Other townships 16, 28, and 30 are connected

Inferring Metapopulation Based Disease Transmission Networks

397

with the others by highways (e.g., S231, S233, S317, and S318), indicating that
their transmission pathways are possibly caused by transportation.

It can readily be noted from Fig. 4 that some inferred edges are thicker than
others, denoting higher transmission inﬂuences. For example, e18−6 (the dash in
the index is used for separation) is thicker than e14−6, e4−6, and e28−6. We inter-
pret this based on Fig. 5 (a) - (f) where reported cases are aggregated on an eight-
day basis for clear presentation. As shown, although township 18 (Fig. 5(e)) has
fewer reported cases than other example townships and contains many zero-case
intervals, its temporal trend does not signiﬁcantly violate the trend of township
6 (Fig. 5(b)). In comparison, the “mountain-valley-mountain” pattern of town-
ship 6 can only be partially matched with other townships (e.g., townships 4
(Fig. 5(a)), 14 (Fig. 5(d)) and 28 (Fig. 5(f))). The inﬂuence from township 6 to
4 is much less than that from the reverse direction. This is because the second
highest peak appearing between time steps 20 to 30 in the trend of township 6
cannot contribute to the valley appearing at the same time interval in the trend
of township 4. However, the reverse contribution is reasonable. Intuitively, the
pair of townships 4 and 8 (Fig. 5(c)) and the pair of townships 14 and 28 have
similar trends respectively, but NetEpi only ﬁnds edges between townships 14
and 28. This is due to that, for townships 4 and 8, their trends before time step
20 seem to be similar, but those after step 20 present a time lag of around 8*8
days.

There are totally 47 rather than 51 townships contained in the inferred net-
work. The 4 missing nodes have neither self-connected edges nor neighborhood
connected edges. The sum of their infection cases is 81, which is a very small
proportion of all infection cases. Therefore, we think their disease transmission
dynamics are caused by accidentally imported cases. In addition, although some
townships are located very close to each other, and in the positions of the up-
stream or the downstream of the same river, they are not connected in the
inferred network (e.g., townships 10 and 17). We believe this is because their
transmission pathways are not signiﬁcant or their malaria endemic is mainly af-
fected by imported cases that overtook the impact of other factors. To interpret
them, currently available information about highways, rivers, and geographical
locations may not be fully adequate, because they represent the transmission
pathways that are the comprehensive results of all impact factors. In addition,
the roads that are locally formed and managed are not displayed in the map,
which may also play signiﬁcant roles in malaria transmission. Missing reports
and data sparsity may aﬀect the results as well. However, our method can still
detect some hidden connections that may draw the attention of policy makers.

5 Conclusion

In this study, based on the need for real-world disease transmission pattern
discovery, we have deﬁned and addressed an inverse network inference prob-
lem. Given only the surveillance data, we have proposed a two-step network
inference algorithm, called NetEpi. Having highlighted the major diﬀerences be-
tween the individual based network inference and the metapopulation based

398

X. Yang et al.

network inference problems, we deﬁned a linear disease transmission model over
a Directed Cyclic Graph (DCG) containing three types of transmission path-
ways as often found in the real-world situations, namely, internal transmission
component, neighborhood transmission component, and external inﬂuence com-
ponent. We performed partial correlation analysis to construct an approximate
network structure for the underlying disease transmission network, and then con-
ducted back-tracking Bayesian learning to iteratively infer edges and estimate
their corresponding weights. We have evaluated the proposed method by using
synthetic data. The experimental results have shown that NetEpi outperforms a
probability based baseline inference method, and performs well over a relatively
small-scale network, which is suﬃcient for metapopulation based disease trans-
mission network modeling in practice. Meanwhile, NetEpi achieves a reasonable
accuracy over diﬀerent network topologies. In addition, we have applied NetEpi
to a real-world disease transmission dataset and have discovered certain mean-
ingful community patterns as well as transmission pathways. Our future work
will focus on inferring disease transmission networks in which there exist various
underlying, sometimes dynamically-changing network structures. We will also
consider other impact factors that may be disease-dependent. This work will
further be applied to the real-world situations for policy makers to develop and
implement intervention strategies for controlling disease transmission.

Acknowledgement. The authors would like to acknowledge the funding sup-
port from Hong Kong Research Grants Council (HKBU211212) and from Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC81273192) for the research
work being presented in this paper.

References

1. Keeling, M.J., Eames, K.T.: Networks and Epidemic Models. J. R. Soc. Interface. 2,

295–307 (2005)

2. Bajardi, P., Poletto, C., Ramasco, J.J., Tizzoni, M., Colizza, V., Vespignani, A.:
Human Mobility Networks, Travel Restrictions, and Global Spread of 2009 H1N1
Pandemic. PLoS ONE 6, e16591 (2011)

3. Gomez-Rodriguez, M., Leskovec, J., Krause, A.: Inferring Networks of Diﬀusion
and Inﬂuence. In: 16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1019–1028. ACM Press, New York (2010)

4. Myers, S., Leskovec, J.: On the Convexity of Latent Social Network Inference. In:

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1741–1749 (2010)

5. Teunis, P., Heijne, J.C.M., Sukhrie, F., van Eijkeren, J., Koopmans, M., Kret-
zschmar, M.: Infectious Disease Transmission as a Forensic Problem: Who Infected
Whom? J. R. Soc. Interface 10(81) (2013)

6. Arino, J.: Diseases in Metapopulations. In: Ma, Z., Zhou, Y., Wu, J. (eds.) Modeling
and Dynamics of Infectious Diseases. Series in Contemporary Applied Mathemat-
ics, vol. 11, pp. 65–123. World Scientiﬁc (2009)

7. Ndeﬀo, M.M.L., Gilligan, C.A.: Resource Allocation for Epidemic Control

in

Metapopulations. PLoS ONE 6, e24577 (2011)

Inferring Metapopulation Based Disease Transmission Networks

399

8. Shang, C.S., Fang, C.T., Liu, C.M., Wen, T.H., Tsai, K.H., King, C.C.: The Role of
Imported Cases and Favorable Meterorological Conditions in the Onset of Dengue
Epidemics. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 4, e775 (2010)

9. Yuan, Y., Li, C.T., Windraw, O.: Directed Partial Correlation: Inferring Large-
Scale Gene Regulatory Network through Induced Topology Disruptions. PLoS
ONE 6, e16835 (2011)

10. Lasserre, J., Chung, H.R., Vingron, M.: Finding Associations among Histone
Modiﬁcations Using Sparse Partial Correlation Networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9,
e1003168 (2013)

11. David, P.W., Bhaskar, D.R.: Sparse Bayesian learning for basis selection. IEEE

Trans. Signal Processing. 52(8), 2153–2164 (2004)

12. Tipping, M.E., Faul, A.: Fast Marginal Likelihood Maximization for Sparse
Bayesian Models. In: 9th International Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Statistics, pp. 3–6 (2003)

13. Tzikas, D., Likas, C., Galatsanos, N.: Sparse Bayesian Modeling with Adaptive

Kernel Learning. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks. 20(6), 926–937 (2009)

14. Leskovec, J., Faloutsos, C.: Scalable Modeling of Real Graphs using Kronecker
Multiplication. In: 24th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 497–
504. ACM Press, New York (2007)

15. Brasil, P., de Pina Costa, A., Pedro, R., da Silveira Bressan, C., da Silva, S., Tauil,
P., Daniel-Ribeiro, C.: Unexpectedly Long Incubation Period of Plasmodium vivax
Malaria, in the Absence of Chemoprophylaxis, in Patients Diagnosed outside the
Transmission Area in Brazil. Malar. J. 10(1), 122 (2011)


