Life Activity Modeling of News Event

on Twitter Using Energy Function

Rong Lu, Zhiheng Xu, Yang Zhang, and Qing Yang

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China

{rlu,zhxu,yzhang,qyang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract. This research is the ﬁrst exploration on modeling life activity
of news event on Twitter. We consider a news event as a natural life form,
and use an energy function to evaluate its activity. A news event on
Twitter becomes more active with a burst of tweets discussing it, and it
fades away with time. These changes of the activity are well captured by
the energy function. Then, we incorporate this energy function into the
traditional single-pass clustering algorithm, and propose a more adaptive
on-line news event detection method. A corpus of tweets which discuss
news events was analyzed using our method. Experimental results show
that our method not only compares favorably to those of other methods
in oﬃcial TDT measures like precision, recall etc., but also has better
time and memory performance, which makes it more suitable for a real
system.

Keywords: life activity modeling, energy function, Twitter, news event
detection, single-pass clustering.

1

Introduction

Twitter is a very popular micro-blogging and social-networking service. More
than 160 million users around the world are using it to remain socially connected
to their friends, family members and co-workers[3]. It allows users to use a short
text within a limit of 140 characters as their posts (also called tweets) through
many ways, including the mobile phone, the Web and text messaging tools[1]
and so on. Twitter also employs a social-networking model called ”following”[4],
in which the user is allowed to follow any other users she wants to, without any
permission or reciprocating by following her back. The one she follows is her
friend, and she is the follower. Being a follower on Twitter means she receives
all the updates from her friends[2].

More than a micro-blogging and social-networking service, Twitter is also
like a news media. Many news outlets have accounts on Twitter, such as ABC,
CNN, and New York Times. They use their accounts to report news, while many
other users follow these accounts to subscribe news coverage. Up to now, New
York Times has already have about 3 million followers. This news reporting and
reading application is so popular on Twitter, because the short text makes the

P.-N. Tan et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2012, Part II, LNAI 7302, pp. 73–84, 2012.
c(cid:2) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

74

R. Lu et al.

news easier to read, and the social-networking functionality makes it faster to
diﬀuse and also provides a good interaction between users.

Unfortunately, Twitter grows too fast. The number of tweets per day is over
200 million. How to obtain the desired news information among the huge mass
of tweets becomes a problem. Therefore, a real-time on-line news event detection
system of Twitter is necessary. Usually, traditional single-pass algorithm[21] is
used to handle this problem. However, there is an ambiguous place of the tradi-
tional single-pass algorithm. This algorithm clusters tweets into diﬀerent clusters
as diﬀerent news events. But, it does not point out when to drop a news event
out of the system memory, as there is no news tweet any more. And, this may
cause it time consuming and memory exhausting for a real system.

In this paper, we implement the traditional single-pass clustering algorithm
by modeling the life activity of news event. First, we use an energy function to
model the life activity of a news event. We consider a news event on Twitter
as a natural life. For a natural life, it eats diﬀerent food containing diﬀerent
energy. It absorbs the energy by a certain transform ratio. Then, it grows old
with time. Similarly, the tweet is food to a news event on Twitter. So the energy
of a single tweet, an energy transferred factor and an energy decayed factor
are introduced and integrated together as an energy function. The value of the
energy function indicates the activity of a news event.

Then, we incorporate the energy function into the traditional single-pass algo-
rithm. The threshold of the traditional single-pass algorithm is a constant. But,
we use a variable to replace it. This variable threshold changes with the activity.
We also add a time window to determine when a news event should be dropped
out of the system memory. This time window changes with the activity of the
news event, too.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we give a review of
related works. In Section 3, we describe the concepts and details of the energy
function. Then, we incorporate it into the traditional single-pass clustering al-
gorithm in Section 4. Section 5 reports the experiments and Section 6 concludes
this paper.

2 Related Work

What is Twitter? Kwak, et al.[2] point out that Twitter is not only a social
network, but something more akin to traditional news media. In its follower-
following topology analysis, [2] has found a non-power-law follower distribution,
a short eﬀective diameter, and low reciprocity, which all mark a deviation from
known characteristics of human social networks[10]. Actually, over 85% of trend-
ing topics on Twitter are headline or persistent news in nature. Java, et al. also
give six main user intentions on Twitter in [11], and reporting news is one of
them.

Now, reporting and reading news is one of the most important application
on Twitter. As enormous amount of tweets are generated by the users every-
day, it is necessary to detect and track news event automatically. Detecting and

Life Activity Modeling of News Event on Twitter Using Energy Function

75

Tracking new event was discussed in the project called Topic Detection and
Tracking(TDT), which is a DARPA-sponsored activity to detect and track news
events from streams of broadcast news stories.In general, clustering techniques
are the major methods of TDT. Salton in [9] introduced hierarchical agglomer-
ative clustering(HAC) method, and Yang, et al.[6] speed up the HAC by using
the technique of bucketing and re-clustering. However, HAC is not very suitable
for the time-ordered data collection. The other clustering method is single-pass
clustering[21,5], which processes the input documents iteratively and chronologi-
cally. Ron and James discuss the implementation and evaluation of a on-line new
event detection and tracking system using the single-pass clustering algorithm
in [20]. They proposed a threshold model, which regarded exploiting temporal
information would lead to improve the performance.

Besides, Chen, et al. proposed an aging theory to model life cycle of news
events in order to improve the traditional single-pass clustering algorithm in [7].
This work is close to ours. However, we go much further. First, we clearly deﬁned
an energy function to evaluate the activity of a news event and give a iterative
algorithm to solve the parameters. Second, we use the activity of a news event to
determine the threshold of the single-pass clustering algorithm, and how long a
news event should stay in the system memory. Third, [7] divides the news events
into short-term and long-term events, while we treat all news events the same
way. Finally, our work focuses on the stream of tweets instead of traditional news
reports or stories.

With the rise of Twitter, researches of event detection on Twitter have already
attracted some attention. Sakaki, et al. gave a real-time event detection algo-
rithm, which monitors tweets to detect a target event like earthquake in [15]. In
their work, they also found out the tweets of a news event follows an exponential
distribution with time. [22] proposed a topic detection technique that permits
to retrieve in real-time the most emergent topics. [23] introduced a method to
collect, group, rank and track breaking news on Twitter, and developed an ap-
plication called ”Hotstream”.

Another issue worthwhile to note is that the tweets are much shorter and
noisier. The tweets stream is mixed by News events, Conversations[12], work
communication[13], business information[14] and so on. [8] made an attempt to
select the tweets that discussed news events only.

3 Modeling Life Activity Using Energy Function

In this section, the details of the energy function are described. We consider a
news event on Twitter as a natural life form. To track its life activity, we use
the concept of energy function. Like the endogenous ﬁtness of an artiﬁcial life
agent[16], the value of the energy function indicates the activity of a news event.

3.1 Deﬁnition of Energy Function

A news event on Twitter becomes popular with a burst of tweets discussing it
and it fades away with time. A tweet discussed a news event is called news

76

R. Lu et al.

tweet. A news tweet to a news event is like food to a natural life. It provides
energy to the news event by a certain transform ratio. However, the life energy
of the news event also diminishes with time as the same as natural life grows
old. Figure 1 shows this life process.

Fig. 1. Life process of a news event on Twitter

α is energy transferred factor, and β is energy decayed factor. Energy
of a single news tweet is denoted by itemEng. Then we divide the whole life
span(the time span from the ﬁrst news tweet to the last one) of a news event into
several successive and equal sized time slice. In time slice t, Et represents the net
energy that a news event obtains, including the energy absorb from news tweets
and the energy lost with time in this time slice. A news tweet is denoted as d,
and the news tweet set in this time slice is denoted as Dt. So, the net energy in
this time slice t is deﬁned as follows:

(α · itemEng(d)) − β

(1)

(cid:2)

Et =

d∈Dt

The total energy of a news event at the nth time slice is the sum of the net
energy of all time slices before, so the Energy Function is:

n(cid:2)

E(n) =

Et =

t=1

n(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(
d∈Dt

t=1

(α · itemEng(d)) − β)

(2)

The value of E(n) just indicates the activity of a news event at the nth time
slice. It is easy to see E(0) = 0. If the news event has N time slices in total,
another constraint of the energy function is:

E(N + 1) = 0

(3)

The meaning of Equation 3 is also obviously. When the news event is over, its
energy value should turn to 0 again.

Life Activity Modeling of News Event on Twitter Using Energy Function

77

From Equation 2, when a burst tweets discuss a news event, the energy value
increases, and the news event becomes more active. As time goes by, less and
less tweets discuss the news event, the decayed factor β plays a more eﬀective
role, the energy value decreases, and the news event becomes less and less active.

3.2 Energy of A Single Tweet

As mentioned above, a news tweet to a news event is like food to natural life.
Diﬀerent food contains diﬀerent nutrition. Similarly, diﬀerent news tweets also
contain diﬀerent energy. The news tweet posted by more inﬂuential user will get
more attention. If more users can read the news tweet, the news event will have
more chance to become popular. It means a news tweet from a more inﬂuential
user contains more energy.

As a social-networking service, the relationships between users construct a
directed map, all users are the nodes of this graph. Researches[17,18,19] have
already studied on how to measure the inﬂuence of a node in the directed graph
or a person in a social network. One simple method of measuring the inﬂuence
of users on Twitter is the In-degree method in[4], it measures the inﬂuence of a
user by the number of her followers. This measurement currently also employed
by Twitter and many other third-party services, such as twitterholic.com and
wefollow.com.

Therefore, we also choose this measurement. f denotes the number of followers
of a Twitter user, fmax denotes the maximum number of followers that a user
has in our dataset. As a result, the inﬂuence of a Twitter user is deﬁned as:

ifuser(f ) =

log (f )

log (fmax)

(4)

It is obvious that 0 ≤ ifuser ≤ 1.

The energy value of a single news tweet is denoted by (itemEng), which has

already shown up in Equation 1 and 2. It is deﬁned as:

itemEng(d) = λ1 + λ2 · ifuser

(5)

where, 0 ≤ λ1 ≤ 1, 0 ≤ λ2 ≤ 1, and λ1 + λ2 = 1.

3.3 Constant Growth and Decay

One particular case of the life cycle of a news event is constant growth and decay,
which means, no matter how active the news event is, the energy transform ratio
and the loss of energy are the same. In another word, the transferred factor α
and the decay factor β are both constants. As a result, the energy function of
Equation 2 can be reduced to a simpler form as:

n(cid:2)

E(n) =

Et = α

t=1

n(cid:2)

(cid:2)

t=1

d∈Dt

itemEng(d) − nβ

(6)

78

R. Lu et al.

There are two parameters α and β in Equation 6. We need two equations to
solve them. Therefore, we let t1, t2 be two diﬀerent time slices in the life span
of a news event, and s1, s2 be the life energy at respective time slice. Then, we
have:

(7)

(8)

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

t1(cid:2)

E(t1) =

Et = α

t=1
t2(cid:2)

t=1

Et = α

E(t2) =

t=1
t2(cid:2)

d∈Dt
(cid:2)

t=1

d∈Dt

t1(cid:2)

(cid:2)

itemEng(d) − t1β = s1

itemEng(d) − t2β = s2

let

y(n) =

n(cid:2)

(cid:2)

t=1

d∈Dt

itemEng(d)

where y(n) means the total energy the news tweets provide to the news event
till nth time slice.

Then, solve Equation 7, we get α and β as follows:

and

s1 · t2 − s2 · t1

t2 · y(t1) − t1 · y(t2)

α =

s1 · y(t2) − s2 · y(t1)
t2 · y(t1) − t1 · y(t2)

β =

(9)

(10)

4 Single-Pass Clustering with Energy Function

If news events were to be sought from a time-ordered static collection, one solu-
tion would be to use document clustering techniques[9,6] to cluster the collection,
and then to return the document from each cluster containing the earliest times-
tamp. However, we are interested in the strict on-line data, which has real-time
constraints and imposes a single-pass restriction over the incoming data stream
of tweets. The traditional single-pass clustering algorithm for news event detec-
tion on Twitter, is described as follows:

1. Build a term vector representation for the tweets and news events. The term
vector of a news event is represented by the geometric center of all term
vectors of its news tweets.

2. Compare a new tweet against the previous news events in memory.
3. If the tweet does not trigger any previous news events by exceeding a thresh-
old, ﬂag the tweet as containing a new event, and add the news event into
the memory.

4. If the tweet triggers an existing news event, ﬂag the tweet to this news event,
and update the term vector of the news event by recomputing the geometric
center.

Life Activity Modeling of News Event on Twitter Using Energy Function

79

There are two shortcomings of the traditional single-pass clustering algorithm.
First, the threshold of single-pass clustering method is a constant, which is not
very reasonable. When a news event is hot and its energy value is high, there are
a lot discussions on Twitter. Therefore, the threshold should turn smaller. So
that, tweets about the same news event with diﬀerent contents can be clustered
into one news event. When the news event is dying, the news tweet is few. The
threshold should turn bigger, in case of other news tweets are clustered in this
news event.

Second, the traditional single-pass clustering algorithm does not mention how
long a news event should stay in the memory. It wastes the system memory and
also increases the time cost. Because, a new tweet still need to be compared to
the dead news event, and it even has a small chance to be ﬂagged to the dead
news event. In a word, this shortcoming could reduce the performance of a real
system in all aspects.

We modify the traditional single-pass clustering algorithm with energy func-
tion to conquer the two problems described above. For the ﬁrst one, we make
the threshold denoted by θ a variable, which changes with the energy value as
follows:

⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩

θ =

θmax,
θmax − θmin
E2 − E1

θmin,

× E +

θmin × E2 − θmax × E1

E2 − E1

,

E > E2
E1 ≤ E ≤ E2
E < E1

(11)

E represents the energy value of a news event. θ changes linearly with E. And it
has an upper bound θmax and a lower bound θmin, when E reaches E2 and E1.
For the second one, we check the time of the last tweet of every news event in
the memory periodically. At the check point, the time is T , and the time of the
last tweet of a news event ei is Ti. A time window W is given. If T − Ti > W ,
ei should be dropped out of the memory. This time window is also change with
the energy value computed by the energy function as follows:

⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩

W =

wmax,
wmax − wmin

E2 − E1

wmin,

× E +

wmin × E2 − wmax × E1

E2 − E1

E > E2
, E1 ≤ E ≤ E2
E < E1

(12)

wmax and wmin are the upper bound and lower bound of W , respectively.

5 Experiments and Evaluation

Before experiments and evaluation, we give a brief description of the dataset for
this research work. Then, we solve the energy transferred factor α and decayed
factor β of the energy function of our dataset. Finally, our news event detection
method is compared with others.

80

R. Lu et al.

5.1 Data Preparation

For the purpose of this research work, we crawled 900 headlines of news reports
from November 2, 2010 to January 10, 2011 through the RSS(Really Simple
Syndication) of the Associated Press website1. For each news report, we crawled
the tweets which matches all the words in the headline. Because all the news
reports are published by one news outlet, they seldom talk about the same news
event. We suppose that each news report represents an independent news event.
Besides, there were other tweets we did not crawl also discussed the news event,
only because they did not match all the words in the headlins of news report.
However, the tweets we crawled can be regarded as a sample of the whole news
tweets set. In this dataset, there are more than 400 thousand tweets in total,
and these tweets were posted by more than 130 thousands users.

Then we divided the dataset into two sets. One is training set, which is used
to train the energy transferred factor α, decayed Factor β, and threshold for
the single-pass clustering algorithm. We randomly chose 259 news events as the
training set. The rest 641 news events constitute the testing set, which is used
for evaluation and comparison.

5.2 Training Energy Transferred Factor and Decayed Factor

In this subsection, an iterative algorithm is proposed to solve the energy trans-
ferred factor α and decayed factor β. Before that, one more point to add is the
maximum energy value of each news event, which will be used to solve the energy
transferred and decayed factors. We suppose the maximum energy of every news
event is proportional to the its activity. As a result, for news events e1 and e2,
they have c1 and c2 news tweets, their whole life span are l1 and l2 hours, and
their maximum energy values are max(e1) and max(e2), the assumption can be
expressed as:

max(e1)
c1/l1

µ =

max(e2)
c2/l2

µ

(13)

where, 0 < μ < 1. If μ = 1, c1/l1
= c1/l1 is the average activity of news event
e1; If μ = 0, c1/l1
= c1 is the total activity. So, when 0 < μ < 1, it can be
regarded as the mixture of the average and the total activity. In our experiment,
μ is set to 0.6.

µ

µ

Therefore, in the training set, if we set the maximum energy value of the news

event emax to 1.0, for other news event e, the maximum energy value is:

max(e) =

ce

cemax

× (

lemax

le

)µ

(14)

The iterative algorithm to solve the energy transferred factor α and energy
decayed factor β are described as follows:

1 http://hosted.ap.org/lineups/TOPHEADS-rss 2.0.xml?SITE=

ILMOL&SECTION=HOME

Life Activity Modeling of News Event on Twitter Using Energy Function

81

1. compute the maximum energy value max(e) of every news event e in the

training set by Equation 14.

2. compute the energy of every tweet in the training set by Equation 5, where

λ1 and λ2 are set to 0.3 and 0.7, empirically.

3. for every news event e in the training set:

(a) initialize t1 = 0.3le, s1 = 0.7max(e), t2 = N + 1, s2 = 0.0, tmax = 0
(b) repeat (c)(d)(e), until tmax does not change any more
(c) compute α and β by Equation 8, 9, 10
(d) ﬁnd the maximum energy value and the time slice tmax using α and β

above by Equation 2

(e) reset t1 = tmax, s1 = max(e), t2 = N + 1, s2 = 0.0

4. compute the average value of all α and β of all news event in the training

set as the ﬁnal results.

The ﬁnal results are: α = 0.00110091, β = 0.00654238. We also give all results
of α and β for all news events in the training set in Figure 2.

Fig. 2. Energy decayed factor vs. energy transferred factor

It is clear to see that there is a obvious linear correlation between the energy
transferred factor and decayed factor. The main reason may be that all news
events follow almost the same tweets distribution with time. [15] considered this
distribution is an exponential distribution. So, using the average value of all
energy transferred factors and decayed factors as the ﬁnal results is appropriate.

5.3 News Event Detection Comparisons

In this experiment, our method(A) is compared to two other methods. The
baseline method(B) is the traditional single-pass algorithm. The other is a ﬁxed
time-window single-pass clustering method(W). This ﬁxed time-window method
is a traditional single-pass clustering method added with a ﬁxed time window
Wf ixed. In this method, it also check the news event in the memory periodically.

82

R. Lu et al.

If there is no new web document for a news event more than Wf ixed time, this
simple modiﬁed method will consider the news event is over, and delete it from
memory.

All the three methods group the tweets in the test set into several clusters.
Five oﬃcial TDT measures[5] including: precision(p), recall(r ), miss(m), false
alarm(f ) and F1-measure(F1 ) are used to evaluate the results of these three
methods.

Table 1 shows the results. W4, W8, W12 are the ﬁxed-time-window method
with a ﬁxed time window of 4, 8, 12 hours. In our method, the Wmin and Wmax
in Equation 12 are set to 4 and 12 hours. So it is reasonable to compare our
method with W4, W8 and W12.

Table 1. Results of TDT measures

p

r

m

f

F1

B
W4
W8
W12

A

0.877939
0.947464
0.941955
0.932875
0.914556

0.904714
0.499588
0.692312
0.779466
0.876216

0.095286
0.500412
0.307688
0.220534
0.123784

0.000285
0.000065
0.000096
0.000124
0.000301

0.891125
0.654215
0.798066
0.849298
0.894976

In Table 1, all ﬁxed time-window methods out-performance the baseline method
a little in precision. However, their recalls are too low to accept. Thus, the base-
line method has a better F1-measure than all ﬁxed time-window methods. For our
method, it achieves both reasonable precision and recall, which results in the best
F1-measure of all methods.

Besides, our method also has acceptable time and memory performance. Fig-
ure 3 shows the time and memory performance of all three methods. The red
lines are our method.

In Figure 3(a) and 3(b), The time cost of the traditional single-pass clustering
method increases as the square of the number of tweets processed, while the ﬁxed
time-window method and our method are increase almost linearly. Our method
is a little slower than the ﬁxed time-window method. Because it needs a few
more computational works of the changing threshold and time window, which is
worthwhile. As there is a big improvement in oﬃcial TDT measures, especially
in recall.

In Figure 3(c) and 3(d), the memory cost is represented by the number of
clusters in memory. The number of clusters of Traditional single-pass method
increases linearly with the number of tweets processed, while the ﬁxed time-
window method and our method both ﬂuctuate around a small constant.

Generally speaking, our method has the best results in the oﬃcial TDT mea-
sures and it also has quite acceptable time and memory performance, which
makes it suitable for a real system.

Life Activity Modeling of News Event on Twitter Using Energy Function

83

Fig. 3. Comparison of time and memory cost

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we report a novel news event detection method of Twitter. Ex-
perimental results show that it performances well not only in the oﬃcial TDT
measures, but also in time and memory cost.

Although the proposed method is quite good for a real system, there are still
two major points needed to be improved. First, the energy transferred factor
and decayed factor could also change with the energy value itself. When the
news event is active, the energy transferred factor could be a little bigger, while
the energy decayed factor could be a little smaller. Second, the user inﬂuence,
which measures the energy of a single tweet, could use a more reliable and
eﬀective model. Moreover, our method can also be more generalized in other
time sequential data mining, in the future.

References

1. Milstein, S., Chowdhury, A., Hochmuth, G., Lorica, B., Magoulas, R.: Twitter and
the micro-messaging revolution: Communication, connections, and immediacy–140
characters at a time. O’Reilly Radar Report (2008)

2. Kwak, H., Lee, C., Park, H., Moon, S.: What is Twitter, a social network or a news

media? In: WWW 2010, pp. 591–600 (2010)

84

R. Lu et al.

3. Huberman, B.A., Romero, D.M., Wu, F.: Social networks that matter: Twitter

under the microscope. Social Computing Laboratory, HP Labs (2008)

4. Weng, J., Lim, E.P., Jiang, J., He, Q.: TwitterRank: ﬁnding topic-sensitive inﬂu-

ential twitterers. In: WSDM 2010, pp. 261–270 (2010)

5. Allan, J., Carbonell, J., Doddington, G., Yamron, J., Yang, Y.: Topic detection
and tracking pilot study: Final report. In: Proc. of the DARPA Broadcast News
Transcription and Understanding Workshop (1998)

6. Yang, Y., Pierce, T., Carbonell, J.: A study of retrospective and on-line event

detection. In: SIGIR 1998, pp. 28–36 (1998)

7. Chen, C.C., Chen, Y.-T., Sun, Y., Chen, M.C.: Life Cycle Modeling of News Events
Using Aging Theory. In: Lavraˇc, N., Gamberger, D., Todorovski, L., Blockeel, H.
(eds.) ECML 2003. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 2837, pp. 47–59. Springer, Heidelberg (2003)
8. Lu, R., Yang, Q.: Extracting News Topics from Microblogs based on Hidden topics

discovering and Text Clustering. In: CCIR 2010, pp. 291–298 (2010)

9. Salton, G.: Automatic text processing: the transformation, analysis, and retrieval
of information by computer. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc. (1989)
10. Newman, M.E.J., Park, J.: Why social networks are diﬀerent from other types of

networks. Phys. Rev. E 68(3), 36–122 (2003)

11. Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T., Tseng, B.: Why we twitter: understanding microblog-
ging usage and communities. In: Proc. of 1st SNA-KDD 2007 Workshop on Web
Mining and Social Network Analysis, pp. 56–65 (2007)

12. Honey, C., Herring, S.C.: Beyond Microblogging: Conversation and Collaboration
via Twitter. In: Proc. of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, pp. 1–10 (2009)

13. Zhao, D., Rosson, M.B.: How and why people Twitter: the role that micro-blogging
plays in informal communication at work. In: Proc. of the ACM 2009 International
Conference on Supporting Group Work, pp. 243–252 (2009)

14. Coon, M., Reeves, B.: Social Media Marketing: Successful Case Studies of Busi-
nesses Using Facebook and YouTube With An In-Depth Look into the Business
Use of Twitter (2010)

15. Sakaki, T., Okazaki, M., Matsuo, Y.: Earthquake shakes Twitter users: real-time

event detection by social sensors. In: WWW 2010, pp. 851–860 (2010)

16. Menczer, F., Belew, R.K., Willuhn, W.: Artiﬁcial Life Applied to Adaptive Infor-

mation Agents. In: AAAI 1995 (1995)

17. Kempe, D., Kleinberg, J., Tardos, ´E.: Inﬂuential Nodes in a Diﬀusion Model for So-
cial Networks. In: Caires, L., Italiano, G.F., Monteiro, L., Palamidessi, C., Yung, M.
(eds.) ICALP 2005. LNCS, vol. 3580, pp. 1127–1138. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)
18. Leavitt, A., Burchard, E., Fisher, D., Gillbert, S.: New approaches for analyzing

inﬂuence on twitter. A publication of the Web Ecology project (2009)

19. Brin, S., Page, L.: The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine.

Computer Network and ISDN Systems, 107–117 (1998)

20. Papka, R., Allan, J.: On-Line New Event Detection using Single Pass Clustering.

University of Massachusetts, Amherst (1998)

21. Van Rijsbergen, C.J.:

Information Retereval, 2nd edn. Butterworths, Mas-

sachusetts (1979)

22. Cataldi, M., Di Caro, L., Schifanella, C.: Emerging topic detection on Twitter
based on temporal and social terms evaluation. In: Proc. of the Tenth International
Workshop on Multimedia Data Mining, pp. 1–10 (2010)

23. Phuvipadawat, S., Murata, T.: Breaking News Detection and Tracking in Twitter.
In: International Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology,
pp. 120–123 (2010)


