Modeling Social Information Learning

among Taxi Drivers

Siyuan Liu1, Ramayya Krishnan1, Emma Brunskill1, and Lionel M. Ni2

1 Carnegie Mellon University

2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract. When a taxi driver of an unoccupied taxi is seeking passengers on a
road unknown to him or her in a large city, what should the driver do? Alternatives
include cruising around the road or waiting for a time period at the roadside in
the hopes of ﬁnding a passenger or just leaving for another road enroute to a
destination he knows (e.g., hotel taxi rank)? This is an interesting problem that
arises everyday in many cities worldwide. There could be different answers to
the question poised above, but one fundamental problem is how the driver learns
about the likelihood of ﬁnding passengers on a road that is new to him (as in
he has not picked up or dropped off passengers there before). Our observation
from large scale taxi drivers behavior data is that a driver not only learns from his
own experience but through interactions with other drivers. In this paper, we ﬁrst
formally deﬁne this problem as Socialized Information Learning (SIL), second
we propose a framework including a series of models to study how a taxi driver
gathers and learns information in an uncertain environment through the use of his
social network. Finally, the large scale real life data and empirical experiments
conﬁrm that our models are much more effective, efﬁcient and scalable that prior
work on this problem.

1 Introduction

The study of how a person gathers information and makes decisions has a long and
varied literature. In the previous research, collective intelligence [13, 19, 23, 27], intel-
ligent agent [7, 10, 12, 21, 22], transfer learning [6, 25, 26] and evidence-based reason-
ing [4, 8, 14] and other methods are proposed to investigate an agent’s learning theory.
But due to the new challenges raised in dynamic uncertain environment [11, 17, 18],
prior work on this topic is either inefﬁcient or inaccurate. Now consider the following
problem.

In our application context, there are 3,187 taxi drivers, and among them there are
25.2% new drivers (less than one year driving experience), 47.1% normal drivers (one
to two years driving experience) and 27.7% experienced drivers (greater than two years
driving experience). When a driver comes to road to pick up passengers, there are two
actions (action set) to choose: waiting at the current location or cruising to other lo-
cations. The knowledge of the taxi driver can be described as the histogram of the
waiting time before picking up a passenger, the number of picking-ups, and the rev-
enue (income) at the given time and location. Given a situation that the drivers come
to an unknown road, in a survey of 1,000 taxi drivers, we study how the drivers fol-
low their own experienced knowledge and the socialized knowledge (the knowledge

J. Pei et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2013, Part II, LNAI 7819, pp. 73–84, 2013.
c(cid:2) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

74

S. Liu et al.

obtained from other drivers) to accordingly make actions. We ﬁnd that different drivers
have very different learning preferences. The new drivers prefer to follow the socialized
knowledge, but the experienced drivers prefer to follow their experienced knowledge.
The standard deviation is larger in new drivers than the experienced drivers. Hence,
different drivers would take various knowledge sources.

In our dataset, we also have the communication records to indicate the socialization
of taxi drivers. When a new driver was assigned to different group compositions, we
studied the income changes (one week). We take 70% as the threshold to deﬁne a group
composition, e.g., New means more than 70% of the drivers in the group are new drivers.
We also tested other thresholds larger than 50%, and the results are very similar. It is
very interesting that even the new driver has less social closeness to the Experienced
group than the New group, but not only individual income but also total income in the
Experienced group have the greater increases than the New group. Hence the more so-
cializations may not give the more accurate knowledge and better income. For example,
the experienced drivers could give the new driver more accurate knowledge than other
drivers.

In a word, the problem is that how the drivers socialize with each other to construct
the accurate knowledge in an uncertain environment, which we deﬁne as Socialized
Information Learning. To tackle the problem, we have two steps to be accomplished,
1) how to retrieve an accurate knowledge set for an individual driver in an uncertain
environment; 2) how to utilize a social network to learn the information. In this paper,
we ﬁrst propose an Individual Information Model to describe taxi drivers’ information
collection, considering the features of the required places and the similarity between the
required places and the experienced places. Second, we introduce the social network
structure with a probability weighting function into the model to describe the non-linear
socialized information learning, called Socialized Information Model.

To summarize the contributions of our work, ﬁrst, we are the ﬁrst to discover the
Socialized Information Learning problem in taxi drivers, and we deﬁne it as a new
uncertain information learning problem; second, we propose a framework including a
series of novel models to solve the socialized information learning problem (not only
model taxi drivers’ behaviors by themselves, but also their social behaviors via the
group information) and investigate it in the dynamic ﬁeld; third, we employ large scale
real life datasets to test our models, and the empirical results show that our models
outperform the state-of-the-art in terms of effectiveness, efﬁciency and scalability.

The paper is structured as follows.In Section 2, we formally deﬁne the socialized
information learning problem. We propose a series of models to solve the new socialized
information learning problem in Section 3, and the empirical experiment results are
illustrated and analyzed in Section 4. The related work to our study is surveyed in
Section 5. Finally, we conclude our work and give directions to the future work.

2 Problem Deﬁnition

2.1 Deﬁnitions

Deﬁnition 1. (Agent) Agent is deﬁned as an entity that is capable of perceiving knowl-
edge and accordingly do action.

Modeling Social Information Learning among Taxi Drivers

75

In our work, an agent is a taxi driver.
Deﬁnition 2. (Agent group) Agent group is deﬁned as a set of agents that are capable
of perceiving knowledge from each other and accordingly do action.
In our work, an agent group is a predeﬁned group of taxi drivers by a taxi company.
We deﬁne the knowledge of a taxi driver as experienced knowledge and socialized
knowledge as below.
Deﬁnition 3. (Experienced knowledge) The experienced knowledge (EK) is deﬁned
as a set of information collected from the agent’s own experience, that is, historical
records.
In our work, the experienced knowledge is a set of the CDFs of waiting-time, picking-
up and revenue distributions at given locations and times, from a given taxis historical
GPS logs and business records. For the road without a given taxi driver’s experienced
knowledge is called an unknown road.
Deﬁnition 4. (Socialized knowledge) The socialized knowledge (SK) is deﬁned as a
set of information collected from other agents’ information in the same group, that is,
other agents’ historical records.
In our work, the socialized knowledge is a set of CDFs of waiting-time, picking-up and
income distributions at given locations and times, from a given taxis group members
GPS logs and business records at the same given locations and times.
Deﬁnition 5. (Action) Action of an agent is deﬁned as a selection of a mutual exclusion
set.
Action of a taxi driver is deﬁned as cruising or waiting for a passenger. At a given
location and time, a taxi driver can select an action (make a decision) of cruising to
other locations until picking up a passenger or waiting for a time period at the given
location until picking up a passenger.
Deﬁnition 6. (Socialization) Socialization of an agent is deﬁned as a communication
between two agents.
Socialization of a taxi driver is a call between two taxi drivers in the same group. Each
socialization is recorded a vector: (i, j, ts, te, ιs, ιe), where i is the caller taxi ID, j is
the callee taxi ID, ts is the call start time, te is the call end time, ιs is the calling start
location (longitude and latitude) and ιs is the calling end location.
Deﬁnition 7. (Socialization closeness) Socialization closeness between two agent is
deﬁned as a function of communications between the two agents.
The socialization closeness between two taxi drivers is deﬁned as:
Deﬁnition 8. (Socialization closeness of taxi drivers) Given two taxi driver i and j in
a group, a time interval t, i has the communication attribute set St
, ...,
}, where 1 ≤ f ≤ m and m is the number of attributes. The socialization closeness
st,m
i
within the time interval t, γt

i = {st,1

i,j is

, ..., st,f

i

i

γt
i,j =

1
m

m(cid:2)

f =1

wf st,f
i,j

(1)

76

S. Liu et al.

where wt
ness set is Γ t = {..., γt
taxi drivers in a given group.

f is the weight of an attribute f in the time interval t. The socialization close-
i,j, ...}, where i, j ∈ N, i, j = 1, 2, ..., n, and n is the number of

In our study, we take the mean of three attributes (m=2), the number of calls and the
call duration as socialization closeness values. Our solution can be extended to other
cases where m > 2 and other functions. The default time interval is set as a minute,
which is set by the communication service company. In this work, we equally take the
weights in 8, which is predeﬁned by users.

For the input communication data, we can construct a social network, G = (V, E),
where V is a set of nodes (taxi drivers), and E is a set of edges (socialization with
socialization closeness as the weight on the edge).

Deﬁnition 9. (Decision knowledge) The decision knowledge (DK) is deﬁned as the
information taken by an agent to make an action.

For a taxi driver, the decision knowledge is based on a set of CDFs of waiting-time,
picking-up and income distributions at given locations and times to make a certain
action.

2.2 Socialized Information Learning

The formal deﬁnition of Socialized Information Learning (SIL) is as below.

Given: a set of agents Q, a set of experienced knowledge E, a set of socialized

knowledge S, and a social network G with socialization closeness Γ .

Goal: a set of decision knowledge D.
Speciﬁcally, given a taxi driver with experienced knowledge and socialized knowl-
edge, under a social network, to make a good action to pick up a passenger in an un-
known road, what is decision knowledge to support the given taxi driver’s action?

In our work, the decision knowledge utilized by a taxi driver to decide the next move

is calculated by a decision function as below.
Deﬁnition 10. (Decision function of a Taxi Driver) P [vt(ι)|nt(ι) ≥  ] ≥ ω, where
ι is a location index, t is a time index, vt(ι) is the revenue, nt(ι) is the number of
passengers,  and ω are thresholds.

The above function means if given a probability of a certain number of passenger is
greater than a given threshold (), the conditional probability of revenue is greater than
ω, the driver is going to wait for passengers at the given location, otherwise, cruise to
other locations.

3 Socialized Information Learning Framework

3.1 Individual Information Model

The basic idea of Individual Information Model is as follows. First, based on the util-
ities of the road and buildings, we label each grid and cluster the grids into different

Modeling Social Information Learning among Taxi Drivers

77

clusters. Second, given a location, we evaluate the similarity between the given location
and the taxi’s experienced locations. Third, we weight the similar experienced knowl-
edge and the socialized knowledge at the given location and time, and ﬁnally get the
decision knowledge. To make the following expression clear, we take the revenue as a
knowledge example to illustrate the model.

Deﬁnition 11. Given a physical location ι =(x,y) and the report set Φ, the revenue
spectrum V (t)
Φ (ι) is the set of all the reported revenues (of the given taxi) at time t in
location ι in Φ, i.e.,

Φ (ι) = {v|∃φ(t)
V (t)

m ∈ Φ, (x(t)

m , y(t)

m , v(t)

m ) = (x, y, v)}

The revenue spectrum at all time instances is also written as VΦ(ι) = ∪t∈[0,+∞] V (t)
Φ (ι).
Since the time is discrete, Φ contains a ﬁnite number of reports and thus the revenue
spectrum is ﬁnite as well.
Deﬁnition 12. The location revenue v(t)
spectrum in location ι at t,

Φ (ι) is deﬁned as the average of the revenue

(cid:3)

v(t)
Φ (ι) =

1
|V (t)
Φ (ι)|

vm∈V (t)

Φ (ι)

vm

(2)

In the real data, the revue spectrum is very sparse and lossy, hence we employ a moving
average technique to reconstruct a sufﬁcient spectrum as below.

Deﬁnition 13. The experienced revenue knowledge H(t)(ι) of a given location ι =
(x, y) is deﬁned as an exponential moving average of the complementary cumulative
distribution function (CCDF) of the instant revenue over the revenue spectrum, i.e.,

H(t)(ι) = αι · H(t−τl)(ι) + (1 − αι) · (1 − P(v ≤ v(t)

(3)
where P(v ≤ v(t)(ι)), v ∈ VΦ(ι) represents the probability that the revenue at ι is less
than or equal to the location instant revenue v(t)
Φ (ι). αι and τι are two parameters to
capture the dynamism of ι.

Φ (ι)))

The parameter αι is a smoothing factor of exponential moving average in H. It is
used to capture the degree of dynamism of the location dynamics. In general, a smaller
αι indicates a higher dynamism and vice versa. The parameter τι is the interval between
two moving averages. It reﬂects the periodic property of the location dynamics.

Different locations will present distinctive dynamic behaviors, resulting in various
settings. In order to systematically study the speed distribution, we apply Fourier Trans-
formation (FT). FT can transform the function from time domain to frequency domain,
revealing inherent periodic property of original function as well as the amplitude of the
corresponding frequency. Speciﬁcally, given the revenue distribution function over time
v(t)(ι) at a location ι, its FT can be calculated by,

ˆf (ξ) =

where t is the variable.

(cid:4) +∞
−∞

v(t)(l)e−2πitξdt,

(4)

78

S. Liu et al.

To calculate the H(t)(ι), we maintain the location history information for six months.
As the computation is carried out at a data center in a centralized manner, the computa-
tional and storage cost is acceptable.

Deﬁnition 14. The similarity between the given location and the taxi’s experienced
locations is deﬁned by the linear correlation coefﬁcient.
Given the similar experienced revenue knowledge H(t)(ι) and the socialized revenue
(cid:2)(t)(ι) from other drivers, we have the decision revenue knowledge as
knowledge H
below.

ˆH(t)(ι) = βH(t)(ι) + (1 − β)H

(cid:2)(t)(ι),

(5)
where β is a parameter capturing the weight of a taxi driver following the own expe-
rienced revenue knowledge, which is determined by users (taxi drivers). In our work,
we learned this parameter from the real life data, which is elaborated in Section 4. The
(cid:2)(t)(ι) is proposed in the next
method to retrieve the socialized revenue knowledge H
section.

3.2 Socialized Information Model

Given a taxi driver, there exists knowledge limitation (hard to possess the knowledge of
the whole city), hence the taxi driver may consult other taxi drivers via a social network
G. In this subsection, we propose a Socialized Information Model to learn knowledge
from other drivers in a social network.

Deﬁnition 15. (Socialization probability) The probability pi,j of a given taxi driver i
socializing with a taxi driver j is the percentage of socialization closeness between the
two drivers over the total socialization closeness among other drivers being socialized
by the driver in a given time period.

Hence the socialized knowledge for a given taxi driver can be described by a probability-
based weighting function over a set of knowledge. Under the expected utility theory, a
taxi driver weights probabilities of learning information linearly. However, the evidence
suggests that the taxi drivers weight probabilities in a non-linear manner. An example
is given as following.

(cid:2)(t)
H
i

(ι) = (

1
n

· n(cid:2)

k=1

[pi,kH(t)

k (ι)]

m

) 1
m ,

(6)

where m is a parameter in generalized mean, determining the appropriate mean (in our
work, we select as 2). pi,kH(t)
k (ι) in Eq. 6 means the socialized knowledge of driver
i from driver j, under the probability of driver i being able to access the experienced
knowledge of driver k.

Unfortunately, this method does not work well under the following two cases: 1)
overweight small probabilities and underweight large ones (S1); 2) do not choose
stochastically dominated options when such dominance is obvious (S2). Hence we uti-
lize a probability weighting function to conduct a non-linear weighting of socialized
knowledge.

Modeling Social Information Learning among Taxi Drivers

79

The particular probability weighting function is

w(p) =

pλ

[pλ + (1 − p)λ]

1
λ

,

(7)

where 0.5 < λ ≤ 1, w(p) is a weighted probability and p is pi,j in Eq. 6.

After weighting pi,j, we utilize Eq. 6 to compute the socialized knowledge.

4 Empirical Experiments

4.1 Experiment Setup

Datasets Description: We collected one year taxi operation data records, including taxi
tracking records, taximeter records and communication records, in a large city in China.
The scale of the whole dataset is almost 1 Terabytes. Taxi tracking records provide
taxis’ group information and traces, including location and time information; taxime-
ter records provide taxis’ revenue, waiting time and picking-up with location-time logs;
communication records provide taxis’ social information, e.g., social closeness. We em-
ploy six months data as training data and the other six months data as test data. We also
collected one month trafﬁc surveillance video data in the city. The trafﬁc data can pro-
vide us the trafﬁc ﬂow, trafﬁc lights, taxis’ picking-up and dropping-off information,
which we employ as the ground truth of taxis’ behaviors in the city.

Experiment Environment: A server with four Intel Core Quad CPUs (Q9550 2.83
GHz) and 32 GB main memory.

Baseline Methods: We compare our method with two baseline methods: one is the
classic method in collective intelligence, called CMM [13], which is popular and gen-
erate many latest approaches; the other is the representative method in agent modeling
in intelligent agent and social system, called ABM [21]. The parameter settings of the
above two methods in our work follow their parameters in their papers [13, 21].

Evaluation Metrics: In our experiments, we employ time cost, scalability to evaluate
efﬁciency, and precision, recall, and F1 to evaluate effectiveness.

4.2 Parameter Learning

Given a taxi driver, we learn the parameters β in Eq. 5 from the driver’s historical
behaviors as follows. When the driver comes to an unknown road, if the driver makes no
call to other drivers to consult the given road’s information, we assume the driver follow
the own experienced knowledge; else if the driver makes calls to other drivers who have
the experienced knowledge of the given road, and the given driver accordingly makes
an action, we assume the driver follow the socialized knowledge. Based on the records
in the historical data, we can have the percentage of a given driver’s follow behavior.
In our study, we take the percentage of following the own experienced knowledge as β.
For different drivers, β is different and updating along the new records coming to the
dataset. The parameter updating is intuitive which is not elaborated in the paper. In the
following experiments, we utilize the percentage number as the parameter.

80

S. Liu et al.

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

n
o
i
s
i
c
e
r
P

 

0.3
2000

n
o
i
s
i
c
e
r
P

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

 
30

 

Our Method
CMM
ABM

5000

 

Our Method
CMM
ABM

3000

4000

Number of Drivers

(a) Different Drivers

50

70

Number of Driver Groups

90

(b) Different Groups

Fig. 1. Precision in Different Drivers and Groups

4.3 Effectiveness Evaluation

We evaluate effectiveness by precision, recall, and F1. Precision is the fraction of re-
trieved results that are relevant to the search, that is, the number of waiting/ cruising
actions resulting from our model over the number of all waiting/ cruising actions made
by taxis resulting from our model. Recall is the fraction of retrieved results that are rele-
vant to the query that are successfully retrieved, that is, the number of waiting/ cruising
actions resulting from our model over the number of all waiting cruising actions made
by taxis.

Table 1. Our Method’s Effectiveness in Different Driver Categories

DC

N

P

R

F

1260 67.8% 57.8% 62.3%
New
Normal
2355 71.7% 67.3% 69.4%
Experienced 1385 80.2% 78.7% 79.4%

Modeling Social Information Learning among Taxi Drivers

81

ABM
Our Method
CMM

600

500

400

300

200

)
e
t
u
n
M

i

(
 
e
m
T

i

100

 

2000

600

500

400

300

200

)
e
t
u
n
i
M

(
 
e
m
T

i

100

 
30

3000

4000

Number of Drivers

(a) Different Drivers

ABM
Our Method
CMM

50

70

Number of Driver Group

 

5000

 

90

(b) Different Groups

Fig. 2. Efﬁciency in Different Drivers and Groups

Table 2. Baseline Method’s Effectiveness in Different Driver Categories

DC

N

P

R

F

1260 31.2% 17.8% 22.7%
New
Normal
2355 39.7% 27.3% 32.3%
Experienced 1385 45.9% 36.5% 40.8%

To evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we design two categories of experi-

ments.

Category 1: effectiveness in different driver categories. The results of our method are
listed in Table 1. DC is the driver category, N is the number of drivers in the category,
P is Precision, R is recall, and F is F1. The results of ABM are listed in Table 2. In our
experiment, CMM returns much worse results than ABM.

Category 2: effectiveness in different drivers, groups and time series. We conducted
precision, recall, and F1 tests in different drivers, groups and time series. Due to page
limitation, we only show the precision results. In Figure 1 (a) and (b), we test the accu-
racy in one month data. The results show that our method returns much more accurate
results than the baseline methods, not only in different drivers scenario, but also in

82

S. Liu et al.

different groups. In a conclusion, our method’s accuracy is much better than baseline
methods, and the accuracy also shows great scalability.

4.4 Efﬁciency Evaluation

We conducted efﬁciency tests in different drivers, groups and time series. The efﬁciency
is measured by the time cost in a knowledge learning process. In Figure 2 (a) and (b),
we test the efﬁciency in one month data. The results show that our method costs much
less time than the baseline methods, not only in different drivers scenario, but also in
different groups. In a conclusion, our method’s efﬁciency is much more better than
baseline methods, and the efﬁciency also shows great scalability.

5 Related Work

In [9], they proposed an approach to the problem of driving an autonomous vehicle
in normal trafﬁc. In [1], they discussed the spatial dispersion problem. But the work
in this category either does not consider the social structure to retrieve the accurate
information, or does not consider the dynamics in the learning process. In organized
learning theory, this category work assumes that the sum of individual knowledge does
not equate to organizational knowledge [2, 3, 5, 15, 16, 24]. In [4], they studied the
distinction between individual knowledge and organizational knowledge, and prove the
assumption. In [21], Ronald et al. demonstrated the design and implementation of an
agent-based model of social activity generation. Szuba et al. [23] attempted to for-
mally analyze the problem of individual existence of a being versus its existence in a
social structure through the evaluation of collective intelligence efﬁciency. Heylighen
et al.[13] argued that the obstacles created by individual cognitive limits and the dif-
ﬁculty of coordination could be overcome by using a collective mental map (CMM).
Deng et al. [7] explored the use of active learning techniques to design more efﬁcient
trials. Rettinger et al.[20] studied the learning of trust and distrust in social interaction
among autonomous, mentally-opaque agents. Wang et al.[25] presented an algorithm
for ﬁnding the structural similarity between two domains, to enable transfer learning at
a structured knowledge level. Cao et al.[6] proposed an adaptive transfer learning algo-
rithm to adapt the transfer learning schemes by automatically estimating the similarity
between a source and a target task. Zhu et al.[27] turned the co-training algorithm into
a human collaboration policy. Unfortunately current work can not work well in our so-
cialized information learning because of the challenges from dynamic updating along
the time and large scale socializations.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we model the social information learning among taxi drivers and employ
large scale real life data and empirical experiments to conﬁrm our models in terms
of much better effectiveness, efﬁciency and scalability than the state-of-the-art. Our
models could be relevant to other domains, e.g., studying animal behavior, or where

Modeling Social Information Learning among Taxi Drivers

83

people go to sell things. We leave taxi driver decision model as the future work. How
to model taxi driver’s decision based on their collected information is a very interesting
but challenging topic. Our current work can make such future work on the accurate and
updated information.

Acknowledgment. This research is supported by the Singapore National Research
Foundation under its International Research Centre @ Singapore Funding Initiative and
administered by the IDM Programme Ofﬁce, and Huawei Corp. grant YBCB2009041-
27, and University Transportation Center grant (DTRT12-G-UTC11) from the US De-
partment of Transportation.

References

1. Alpern, S., Reyniers, D.: Spatial dispersion as a dynamic coordination problem. Theory and

Decision 53(1) (2002)

2. Argote, L., Miron-Spektor, E.: Organizational learning: From experience to knowledge. Or-

ganization Science 22 (2011)

3. Argyris, C., Schn, D.: Organizational learning: A theory of action perspective. Addison-

Wesley (1978)

4. Bhatt, G.: Information dynamics, learning and knowledge creation in organizations. The

Learning Organization 7(2) (2000)

5. Bontis, N., Coss, V.M.: Managing an organizational learning system by aligning stocks and

ﬂows. Journal of Management Studies 39 (2002)

6. Cao, B., Pan, J., Zhang, Y., Yeung, D., Yang, Q.: Adaptive transfer learning. In: Proc. of

AAAI (2010)

7. Deng, K., Pineau, J., Murphy, S.: Active learning for developing personalized treatment. In:

Proc. of UAI (2011)

8. Devlin, K.: A framework for modeling evidence-based, context-inﬂuenced reasoning. In:

Proc. of CONTEXT (2003)

9. Forbes, J., Huang, T., Kanazawa, K., Russell, S.: The batmobile: Towards a bayesian auto-

mated taxi. In: Proc. of IJCAI (1995)

10. Fu, W., Song, L., Xing, E.P.: Dynamic mixed membership blockmodel for evolving net-

works. In: Proc. of ICML (2009)

11. Ge, Y., Xiong, H., Liu, C., Zhou, Z.-H.: A taxi driving fraud detection system. In: Proc. of

ICDM (2011)

12. Glaubius, R., Tidwell, T., Gill, C., Smart, W.: Real-time scheduling via reinforcement learn-

ing. In: Proc. of UAI (2010)

13. Heylighen, F.: Collective intelligence and its implementation on the web: Algorithms to de-

velop a collective mental map. Comput. Math. Organ. Theory 5(3), 253–280 (1999)

14. Kay, J., Niu, W.T., Carmichael, D.J.: Oncor: ontology- and evidence-based context reasoner.

In: Proc. of IUI (2007)

15. Lee, S.J., Popovi´c, Z.: Learning behavior styles with inverse reinforcement learning. ACM

Trans. Graph. 29 (July 2010)

16. Li, P., Yu, J.X., Liu, H., He, J., Du, X.: Ranking individuals and groups by inﬂuence propa-
gation. In: Huang, J.Z., Cao, L., Srivastava, J. (eds.) PAKDD 2011, Part II. LNCS, vol. 6635,
pp. 407–419. Springer, Heidelberg (2011)

17. Liu, S., Liu, C., Luo, Q., Ni, L., Krishnan, R.: Calibrating large scale vehicle trajectory data.

In: Proc. of IEEE MDM (2012)

84

S. Liu et al.

18. Liu, S., Liu, Y., Ni, L.M., Fan, J., Li, M.: Towards mobility-based clustering. In: Proc. of

ACM SIGKDD (2010)

19. Nickel, M., Tresp, V., Kriegel, H.-P.: A three-way model for collective learning on multi-

relational data. In: Proc. of ICML (2011)

20. Rettinger, A., Nickles, M., Tresp, V.: Statistical relational

learning of trust. Mach.

Learn. 82(2) (2011)

21. Ronald, N., Dignum, V., Jonker, C., Arentze, T., Timmermans, H.: On the engineering of
agent-based simulations of social activities with social networks. Inf. Softw. Technol. 54(6)
(2012)

22. Russell, S.: Learning agents for uncertain environments (extended abstract). In: Proc. of

COLT (1998)

23. Szuba, T., Pola´nski, P., Schab, P., Wielicki, P.: On Efﬁciency of Collective Intelligence Phe-
nomena. In: Nguyen, N.T., Kowalczyk, R. (eds.) Transactions on CCI III. LNCS, vol. 6560,
pp. 50–73. Springer, Heidelberg (2011)

24. Templeton, G.F., Lewis, B.R., Snyder, C.A.: Development of a measure for the organizational

learning construct. J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 19(2) (2002)

25. Wang, H., Yang, Q.: Transfer learning by structural analogy. In: Proc. of AAAI (2011)
26. Xiao, L., Zhou, D., Wu, M.: Hierarchical classiﬁcation via orthogonal transfer. In: Proc. of

ICML (2011)

27. Zhu, X., Gibson, B., Rogers, T.: Co-training as a human collaboration policy. In: Proc. of

AAAI (2011)


