Patent Evaluation Based on Technological

Trajectory Revealed in Relevant Prior Patents

Sooyoung Oh1, Zhen Lei2, Wang-Chien Lee1, and John Yen3

1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering
2 Department of Energy and Mineral Engineering
3 College of Information Sciences and Technology,

The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA

{sooh,wlee}@cse.psu.edu, zlei@psu.edu, jyen@ist.psu.edu

Abstract. It is a challenging task for ﬁrms to assess the importance
of a patent and identify valuable patents as early as possible. Counting
the number of citations received is a widely used method to assess the
value of a patent. However, recently granted patents have few citations
received, which makes the use of citation counts infeasible. In this paper,
we propose a novel idea to evaluate the value of new or recently granted
patents using recommended relevant prior patents. Our approach is to
exploit trends in temporal patterns of relevant prior patents, which are
highly related to patent values. We evaluate the proposed approach using
two patent value evaluation tasks with a large-scale collection of U.S.
patents. Experimental results show that the models created based on
our idea signiﬁcantly enhance those using the baseline features or patent
backward citations.

Keywords: patent, evaluation, ranking.

1

Introduction

Patent evaluation, including predicting a patent’s future value, comparing the
value of patents in a given patent set, and identifying inﬂuential patents in a
ﬁeld or within a company, is a challenging but important task for technology
and innovation management in a ﬁrm. The forward citations of a patent (i.e.,
citations to the patent made by other patents granted in later/forward times),
in combination with other patent information such as the number of claims, etc,
have been widely used as a measure to assess the patent economic value [1, 2, 3,
4]. As highly cited patents imply a number of successful lines of innovation (that
is why they are highly cited), their inventions are likely to be technologically
signiﬁcant and economically valuable. However, it often takes years for a patent
to receive suﬃcient information of forward citations in order to make meaningful
assessment of its value.

This paper addresses the challenging problem of evaluating patents at the
early stage of their patent life when there is little information about forward
citations. To highlight this challenge, we ask the following question: Can we

V.S. Tseng et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2014, Part I, LNAI 8443, pp. 545–556, 2014.
c(cid:2) Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014

546

S. Oh et al.

evaluate patents immediately after they are granted when there is no forward ci-
tation information at all? This is not merely a theoretically interesting question
stressing the limitation of forward citation-based approaches for patent evalua-
tion, but one with practical importance. A patent grant, to a large extent, secures
the patent protection and ascertains the scope of the right for an invention. This
is often the point of time when the patent owner decides what to do with the
invention, e.g., developing/incorporating it into products in house or licensing
to someone else. This is also the point of time when the deal of licensing/selling
the invention, if any, is made. Therefore, it is crucial to predict the value of a
patent right after its grant.

In the absence of forward citation information, one naturally turns to the
backward citations of the patent under evaluation, i.e., the references made by
the focal patent to prior patents (which are granted in past/backward times),
besides other useful information such as the number of claims, the number of
ﬁgures, etc. Indeed, previous studies [1, 2, 3, 4] have shown that the information
of patent backward citations can be used to measure the novelty of a patent, and
thus useful for evaluating its technological and economic value of a patent as well.
Patent backward citations provide information about technologically relevant
prior patents for the focal patent, and we can use it to estimate how novel and
in what stage of the technology trajectory the focal patent is. However, the idea
of using backward citations for patent evaluation also has limitations. First,
backward citations are to a large extent missing for one or two years prior to the
patent grant year. The reason is simple. Applicants and examiners reference prior
patents either at patent ﬁling or during the early stage of patent examination,
which tend to be one or two years earlier than patent grant. Therefore, backward
citations in ﬁrst one or two lagged years (presumably the most important piece
of information regarding the focal patent’s technology stage or novelty) are often
missing. Second, patent backward citations, unlike paper references that focus
on completeness, are often parsimonious and incomplete. The average number
of citations is usually less than 20 and many patents have no backward citations
at all.

In this paper, aiming to evaluate a newly granted patent with no forward ci-
tations and incomplete (and often quite sparse) backward citation information,
we develop a novel approach to assess value of a patent by exploring techno-
logically relevant prior patents as a supplement to the backward citations. The
idea behind our approach is simple yet innovative. Since the key in a backward
citation-based patent evaluation approach is to ﬁnd relevant prior patents of a fo-
cal patent via its backward citations, we shall also identify other good (or better)
technologically relevant prior patents through other means. We test this idea by
identifying a set of technologically relevant prior patents based on content sim-
ilarity, and use them to construct features representing a focal patent’s novelty
and stage in the technology trajectory. Identiﬁcation of relevant prior patents
based on content similarity seems simple, yet it works well. This is exactly the
beauty of our proposed approach: simple, intuitive and working well.

Patent Evaluation Based on Technological Trajectory Revealed

547

Moreover, to measure the novelty of a patent, its stage of technology trajec-
tory, or other properties related to patent value, we focus on the dynamics of
relevant prior patents over past years (i.e., in form of temporal distribution). We
have studied a series of eﬀective features exhibiting discriminative temporal be-
haviors from diverse aspects, and identiﬁed six temporal patterns and features.
We propose two prediction models and evaluate the performance of the models
using features from patent backward citations, relevant prior patents, or both to-
gether with baseline features. Our experimental results show that relevant prior
patents complement patent backward citations, and signiﬁcantly enhance the
evaluation of patent value.

Our major contributions in this work are as follows:

- Problem of Patent Evaluation on Newly Granted Patents: We point
out the limitation in using forward citations and backward citations to evaluate
newly or recently issued patents. This is a very important and practical problem
for technology management in ﬁrms.

- New Patent Evaluation Approach: Without relying on forward patent
citation information, our patent evaluation approach utilizes a set of technologi-
cally relevant prior patents identiﬁed based on content similarity to supplement
information derived from backward citations.

- Features based on Temporal Trending of Relevant Prior Patents:
We propose six sets of features measuring trending and temporal patterns in
multiple subsets of technologically relevant prior patents and backward citations,
which are highly related to the value of a patent.

2 Related Work

The study on patent quality evaluation using patent mining techniques has re-
ceived growing interests. Hasan et al. [5] proposed a patent ranking model, called
COA (Claim Originality Analysis), which evaluated the value of a patent based
on the novelty (recency) and impact (inﬂuence) of the important phrases in
Claim section of a patent. They used the number of patent citations received,
patent maintenance status, and their own conﬁdential ratings to evaluate the
proposed model with patents related to software technology or business process.
Jin et al. [6] introduced a model recommending patent maintenance decision.
They proposed diverse features, which could measure the value of a patent, and
built a ranking model to predict whether a patent should be maintained or aban-
doned when a renewal decision was made. Liu et al. [7] proposed a latent graphi-
cal model to assess patent quality using quality-related features, such as citation
quality, technology relevance, claim originality, etc. They used the number of
citation received, court decisions (ruled as valid or invalid), and reexamination
records as patent quality measurements. Even though the court decisions may
be strongly correlated with patent quality, it is hard to get enough samples to
train the model. Oh et al.
[8] introduced a weighted citation method. They dis-
tinguished diﬀerent types of citations to rank patents by their importance. Hu
et al. [9] proposed a topic-based temporal mining approach to assess the novelty

548

S. Oh et al.

and inﬂuence of a patent to discover core patents. They extracted topics from
a patent document and quantiﬁed a patent’s novelty and inﬂuence by analyzing
the topic activeness variations along the timeline. Compared to those previous
works, our study is focused on augmenting the values from patent citations and
relevant prior arts. Instead of extracting diverse features from patent documents
or using text analysis, our features are mainly extracted from temporal patterns
and trends of patent citations or relevant patents, which make the model simpler
and easier to build.

3 Patent Value Evaluation Approach

In this section, we deﬁne the patent value evaluation problem, and present our
approaches to solve this problem.

Research Goal: Let D = (cid:2)D1, D2,··· , DN(cid:3) be a set of newly granted N

patents, which have no forward citation yet. Our goal is to evaluate these new
patents, using only information available when they are granted. As discussed
earlier, patent evaluation may include predicting a patent’s future value, compar-
ing the value of patents in a given patent set, and identifying inﬂuential patents
in a ﬁeld or within a company.
Relevant Prior Patent Based Patent Evaluation: To evaluate the value
of a newly granted patent, we use information on technologically relevant prior
patents. In particular, we focus on the temporal patterns and trending of the
relevant prior patents that reﬂect the stage of the technology trajectory and/or
novelty of the focal patent. For example, if the focal patent is associated with
a lot of technologically relevant prior patents in the years immediately prior to
its grant, its technology was likely to be new and on the rise, which would in
turn suggest the focal patent likely to be novel and valuable. Inspired by existing
patent backward citation based patent evaluation [1, 2, 3, 4], our ﬁrst proposal is
to identify the set of relevant prior patents for the focal patent based on its back-
ward citations. However, as we pointed out earlier, patent backward citations
are often incomplete overall and seriously missing in the most recent 1-2 years
before patent grant year. Alternatively, we propose to identify a comprehensive
set of technologically relevant prior patents based on content similarity. We then
construct features that reﬂect the temporal patterns and trends of this set of
relevant prior patents, which should be related to the value of the focal patent.
Features of Temporal Trending: Another innovative idea in this paper is
that we propose to exploit the trending and the stage of a focal patent among
relevant patents. We aim to reveal the technology stage, novelty and value of the
focal patent from diﬀerent aspects. For example, if the focal patent is associated
with a lot of recent technologically relevant prior patents that are assigned to the
same ﬁrm (or invented by the same inventor), this might indicate that the ﬁrm
(or the inventor) has become very interested in the ﬁeld of the focal patent and
devoted quite a lot of resources in R&D related to the focal patent. Therefore,
the focal patent and its technology ﬁeld might be important to the ﬁrm (or the
inventor), thus more likely to be valuable.

Patent Evaluation Based on Technological Trajectory Revealed

549

Patent Evaluation Models: There is no public available gold standard or
benchmarks that clearly deﬁne the value of a patent in monetary terms. We
consider two patent evaluation cases: i) ranking a set of patents, ii) identifying
top-ranked patents. We are particularly interested in ranking patents because
the patent ranking can provide a relative comparison of patent values. In these
two cases, we use patent forward citations and patent maintenance status as
indicators of patent values. Corresponding to the two cases, we learn predic-
tion models to evaluate patent values. The ﬁrst model is a ranking model that
ranks patents according to their values. Often ﬁrms are more interested in un-
derstanding the relative values among a set of patents, rather than predicting
their absolute value. For instance, when a ﬁrm decides to renew only half of its
patents, or two ﬁrms decides whether a deal of cross-licensing is worthwhile to
pursue, all matters is the relative ranking of the patents involved. In this model,
we use the number of forward citations that a patent receives in a long time
window (e.g., 12 years after grant) as an indicator of the patent’s true value.
The second model identiﬁes high-valued patents. To make their technology and
patent management decisions, ﬁrms often need to know which are the most
valuable inventions/patents in their patent portfolio. For example, given limited
ﬁnancial resource, a ﬁrm may only aﬀord to maintain the top 10% of its patents.
We learn a binary classiﬁer to identify top 10% or 20% most valuable patents
based on 12-year forward citations.

4 Feature Extraction

We conjecture that the temporal distribution or trending of technologically rele-
vant prior patents, in combination of patent backward citations, is highly related
to the value of a patent. Moreover, the subsets of relevant prior patents in vari-
ous relations to the focal patent might reﬂect patent value from diﬀerent angles.
In this section, we introduce the feature sets describing the temporal patterns in
technologically relevant prior patents and backward citations of a newly granted
patent in a variety of angles.

4.1 Feature Sources and Types

We describe main feature sources for the patent evaluation models in this work
as follows: Given a patent, Di, {Qi, Ci, Ri} denotes the three main feature
sources, where Qi = (cid:2)f1, f2,··· , fl(cid:3) is l patent characteristic features, Ci =
(cid:2)p1, p2,··· , pn(cid:3) is n patent backward citations, and Ri = (cid:2)p1, p2,··· , pm(cid:3) is m

technologically relevant prior patents. First, we choose some features capturing
the characteristics of a patent as our baseline features. These patent character-
istics, including the number of claims, ﬁgures and assignees, are often used in
previous studies. We also include binary indicator variables to identify the tech-
nology ﬁelds of the focal patent. These variables help to control the variance on
patent value among patents in diﬀerent technology ﬁelds. The patent character-
istic features that we use are the number of claims, ﬁgures, inventors, assignees,
foreign references, other references, USPC codes, and IPC codes.

550

S. Oh et al.

In addition to these baseline features, we propose a variety of features based
on temporal distribution pattern and trending of the subsets of relevant prior
patents, such as the same assignee set, the same inventor set, or the same
technological class set, etc. These features hopefully reﬂect or are related to
the value of a focal patent, and would be used in our three patent evalua-
tion models. The temporal distribution of relevant prior patents is deﬁned as
T (Di) = fY = (cid:2)fY1 , fY2,··· , fYn(cid:3), where fY1 is the number (frequency) of prior
patents in the set of retrieved relevant prior patents that were granted in the
ﬁrst year prior to the patent Di, fY2 is the number of relevant prior patents
granted in the second year prior to the patent Di, and so on. We call the citing
year gap, Y1, Y2,··· , as “citation lag” in this paper.

4.2 Features for Temporal Patterns

Our approach is to capture the attractiveness of the technology and the novelty
of a new patent using temporal trends in the sets of relevant prior patents and
backward citations. Moreover, we look at temporal patterns in the subsets of rel-
evant prior patents or backward citations that share the same assignees, the same
inventors, or the same technology class, with the focal patent. These temporal
trends, revealed by the activities of inventors and assignees, or the popularity
of the technology ﬁeld in years prior to the grant of the focal patent, could con-
tain further information about the novelty and the technology stage of the focal
patent, from the perspectives of the assignees, inventors and technology area of
the focal patent. In addition, prior patents owned by other assignees or in other
technology ﬁelds might also be important to provide a comprehensive under-
standing of the technology position and the novelty of invention, which could be
related to the value of the patent. Thus, we also construct features that charac-
terize the temporal patterns and trending in relevant prior patents or backward
citations, owned by other assignees, or in other technology ﬁelds. In total, we
introduce six sets of features to characterize the temporal patterns and trending
in relevant prior patents or backward citations from various perspectives.

We capture the temporal trends based on the number (frequency) of techno-
logically relevant prior patents or backward citations in each of the 20 years prior
to the grant of a new patent. The temporal patterns between patent citations
and relevant prior patents tend to be quite diﬀerent. For example, backward
citations in most recent one or two years prior to the grant year of the focal
patent are very few, due to the fact that most of backward citations are cited by
applicants or examiners at the time of ﬁling or shortly after the ﬁling (during the
process of prior art search), which is one or two years earlier than patent grant.
By contrast, the number of relevant prior patents in the most recent years prior
to the grant of the focal patent tends to be greatest, relative to those in other
prior years. This is particularly true for patents with higher value. These pat-
terns suggest that information about relevant prior patents, in particular those
in most recent years, could be very useful for patent evaluation.

To capture a trend, we use Gaussian ﬁlters to measure diverse distribution
patterns of relevant prior patents or backward citations according to their grant

Patent Evaluation Based on Technological Trajectory Revealed

551

year. We use this Gaussian ﬁltering technique to construct features capturing
temporal trends. A feature, Fy, which characterizes the temporal trend of rele-
vant prior patents (or backward citation) for the last N years regarding the yth
, α > 0, where fYi is the frequency of
citation lag year, is Fy =
th lag year relative to the
relevant prior patents (or backward citations) in the Yi
grant year of the focal patent. Then, we can use K features, F1, F2,··· , FK , to

−α(i−y)2

(cid:2)N

i=1 fYie

evaluate the value of a patent according to their temporal trends. The six sets of
features for temporal patterns (trends) in technologically relevant prior patents
(or backward citations) are deﬁned as follows:

Temporal Distribution of Backward Citations and Relevant Prior
Patents (C1): We ﬁrst measure the novelty and technology stage of a newly
granted patent using the temporal trend of all the technologically relevant prior
patents (or backward citations). To capture those temporal patterns, we con-
struct features based on Gaussian ﬁlters. In addition, we add the frequency for
the most recent prior year (one year lag from the grant of the focal patent), ex-
pecting to capture patent value well, especially with those most recent relevant
prior patents. Thus, the features for C1 are C1(D1) = (cid:2)F1, F2,··· , FK, fY1 , fY2,
fY3(cid:3).
Temporal Distribution of Backward Citations to and Relevant Prior
Patents in the Same Assignee (C2): This set of temporal trend features
focus on the subsets of relevant prior patents and backward citations assigned
to the same assignees as the focal patent. If there are many recent relevant prior
patents ﬁled by the same ﬁrm, this might suggest that the ﬁrm has a strong
interest in research and innovation related to the focal patent, thus the focal
patent might be important and valuable. However, the number of backward
citations in most recent years prior to the grant of the focal patent is quite
small, and cannot be used to evaluate patents. Thus again the information on
relevant prior patents, in particular in the most recent prior years, could be very
useful in patent evaluation. We construct the same features as deﬁned in C1,
but only based on temporal patterns in the subsets of relevant prior patents and
backward citations that share the same assignees as the focal patent.

Temporal Distribution of Backward Citations to and Relevant Prior
Patents in the Same Inventor (C3): We also look into the temporal patterns
in relevant prior patents or backward citations ﬁled by the same inventors of the
focal patent. It is intuitive if there are a large number of recent relevant prior
patents ﬁled by the same inventors, this would suggest that the inventors have
been devoted themselves to this line of research, which in turn suggest that the
technology is important and valuable. Again here, the number of most recent
backward citations that were invented by the same inventors are small and not
useful to capture this intuition. However, we can use the recent relevant prior
patents by the same inventors. We construct the same features as deﬁned in C1,
but only applied to the subsets of relevant prior patents and backward citations
that share the same inventors as the focal patent.

552

S. Oh et al.

Temporal Distribution of Backward Citations to and Relevant Prior
Patents in the Same Technology Class (C4): The temporal patterns in
relevant prior patents in the same technology ﬁeld could gauge the popularity
of the technology ﬁeld of the focal patent. We construct the same features as
deﬁned in C1, but only based on temporal patterns in the subsets of relevant
prior patents and backward citations that share the same technology class (i.e.,
the primary U.S. patent class) as the focal patent.

Temporal Distribution of Backward Citations to and Relevant Prior
Patents in the Diﬀerent Assignees (C5): The relation of a focal patent to
relevant prior patents ﬁled by other assignees (i.e., other ﬁrms) can be used to
measure the attractiveness and thus the value of the patent because it reﬂects the
interest in the associated technology by other ﬁrms. Thus, we use the assignee
diversity in relevant prior patents as another feature set in predicting patent
value. To capture the diversity of assignees in relevant prior patents, we use
the entropy of the distribution in diﬀerent assignees in relevant prior patents
in each year prior to the grant of the focal patent. High entropy means that a
focal patent is related to other previous inventions ﬁled by a larger number of
other ﬁrms. We use the entropy values in each prior year to construct this set
of features. The features of C5 are deﬁned as C5(Di) = (cid:2)E1, E2,···(cid:3), where Ey
is the entropy in yth citation lag year, Ey = − (cid:2)K
k=1 P r(ak)log(P r(ak)), where
ak is the kth assignee, K is the number of diﬀerent assignees in relevant prior
patents (or backward citations) for the last y years prior to the grant of the focal
patent. P r(ak) is the probability of the assignee ak appeared in relevant prior
patents (or backward citations) in that year.

Temporal Distribution of Backward Citations to and Relevant Prior
Patents in the Diﬀerent Classes (C6): We also look into the diversity in
technology classes in relevant prior patents (or backward citations), i.e., how
many diﬀerent technology classes in relevant prior patents (or backward cita-
tions). This information could be useful in patent evaluation as it indicates how
much the focal patent might be related to a diversity of technologies. However,
the pattern in relevant prior patents is diﬀerent from citations. We use the same
method in C5 to construct this set of features, C6, to capture the temporal pat-
tern in entropies in technology ﬁelds of either relevant prior patents or backward
citations.

5 Experiments

We perform an empirical evaluation to validate our proposed ideas. In this sec-
tion, we describe our experimental setup and discuss the results.

5.1 Experimental Setup

Data Set: We evaluate the proposed approaches using 4 million U.S. patent
documents granted since 1980 until 2012. We use 14,000 patents granted on

Patent Evaluation Based on Technological Trajectory Revealed

553

January 2001 as our evaluation set because those patents are the most recent
patents that have information about their 4th, 8th and 12th year renewal status
and enough forward citations which we use as the indicator of the patent value.
About 2 million patents granted between 1980 and 2000 are used as the pool of
prior patents from which we retrieve technologically relevant prior patents for
a given focal patent. Backward citations are also restricted to patents granted
between 1980 through 2000. Patents granted between 2001 and 2012 are used to
count the 12-year forward citations for the focal patent.

Content-Similarity Based Retrieval of Relevant Prior Patents: We
build a prior patent retrieval/recommendation engine based on content similarity
using information retrieval techniques. A patent document consists of multiple
sections such as Title, Abstract, Claims, Description, etc. We extract search
query terms from each section of a patent document. Xue and Croft [10] proposed
a method to transform a query patent into a search query. Our approach to
generate the best query terms is similar with their method. We use Indri [11]
as our retrieval model. Given a search query, it returns ranked relevant prior
patents with retrieval scores (relevance scores). Indri supports a weighted-term
query. Xue and Croft showed a better performance when a log-scaled TF (Term
Frequency) is used as a weight on a query term. We observed the same and thus
use the a log-scaled TF as the weight on a query term.

Feature Set for Evaluation: We prepare four feature sets to evaluate our
approaches. The ﬁrst feature set (FS1) is the baseline features, involving only 8
patent characteristics features and 6 HJT-6 technological class indicators. The
second feature set (FS2) uses temporal pattern and trend features extracted from
backward citations, together with baseline features. FS1, FS2 is the benchmark,
to which we compare our proposed approach using technologically relevant prior
patents. The third feature set (FS3) uses temporal patterns and trending features
extracted from relevant prior patents, together with FS1. The last feature set
(FS4) combines temporal trend features based on both relevant prior patents
and backward citations, together with FS1. Comparing FS4 to FS2, we can see
the incremental improvement in performance from augmenting information on
relevant prior patents to backward citations.

Evaluation Metrics: We use the Spearman’s rank correlation coeﬃcients to
evaluate the patent ranking model. The performance of the top-ranked patent
classiﬁcation and the least valuable patent classiﬁcation are evaluated by Preci-
sion, Recall, F-score and AUC (Area Under Curve).

5.2 Analysis of Experimental Results

We conduct experiments on the two patent evaluation tasks detailed in Section
3 for each feature set. Then, we investigate the relative signiﬁcance of those six
temporal pattern features we propose.

554

S. Oh et al.

Table 1. Predicting Patent Ranks:
denotes a signiﬁcant diﬀerence (p-value<0.05)
from FS2. 2,3,5,10-class are divided with the same size. 5,10-class(FC) use ﬂoor(log(#
of forward citations+1) as ranking values).

∗

FS1

FS2

FS3

FS4

LR

SVR

LR

SVR

LR

Rank

2-class
3-class
5-class
10-class

∗
0.3095 0.3115 0.3711 0.3699 0.3593
∗
0.3494 0.3690 0.4176 0.4282 0.4075
∗
0.3682 0.3890 0.4396 0.4522 0.4272
∗
0.3759 0.3929 0.4495 0.4618 0.4375
∗
5-class(FC) 0.3667 0.3878 0.4378 0.4504 0.4243
∗
10-class(FC) 0.3764 0.3988 0.4505 0.4651 0.4376
∗
0.3795 0.4049 0.4534 0.4688 0.4407

# of FC

SVR

LR

∗
∗
0.3974
0.3875
∗
0.4418 0.4497
∗
0.4622 0.4718
∗
0.4709 0.4831
∗
∗
0.4686
0.4626
∗
∗
0.4838
0.4762
∗
∗
0.4794
0.4870

SVR

∗
0.4112
∗
0.4704
∗
0.4948
∗
0.5070
∗
0.4936
∗
0.5105
∗
0.5121

Predicting the Ranks of Patents: In this experiment, we evaluate the ranks
of patents. Using patent ranks, we compare the relative value among patents or
assess overall value for a patent portfolio. To test diverse ranking scenarios, we
use several ranking approaches. We ﬁrst divide the ordered evaluation set based
on their 12-year forward citations (ground truth), into 2, 3, 5, or 10 classes of
the same size. Thus, we prepare four types of the uniformly distributed ranked
values. We also directly use the log-scaled number of forward citations. To build
prediction models, we use two regression models, Linear Regression (LR) and
Support Vector Regression (SVR). In all these cases the Spearman’s rank cor-
relation coeﬃcients are used to evaluate the ranking performance. Table 1 show
the performance of predicting patent ranks with diverse ranking values using LR
and SVR. The results in Table 1 show that SVR is better than LR in overall per-
formance. According to the SVR results, the feature set based on relevant prior
patents (FS3) is better than that based on backward citations (FS2). Overall, the
combined feature set (FS4) achieves the best performance which is signiﬁcantly
better than FS1 with more than 27% improvement in all these cases.

Identifying the Top-Ranked Patents: We conduct experiments to predict
the top-ranked patents. We prepare two top-ranked patent data sets based on
their forward citations. One is the top-10% ranked patents, and the other is
the top-20% ranked patents. We build the patent evaluation model using two
binary classiﬁer, Random Forest (RF) and Support Vector Machine (SVM).
Table 2 shows the results of classifying the top-10% ranked and top-20% ranked
patents using RF and SVM. In both cases, the relevant patents (FS3) shows
better performance than patent citations (FS2), and again, we can get the best
results when we use both patent citations and relevant patents together (FS4).
In general, SVM shows better results than RF. The overall results shows our
approaches works for predicting the top-ranked patents.

Feature Analysis: Finally, we investigate the relative importance of the six tem-
poral patterns and the extracted trending features discussed in Section 4.2. Table 3
shows the rank prediction results when we add or remove one of these six temporal
pattern features in the models. According to the results, the temporal distribution
of relevant prior patents and backward citations (C1) is the key factor among six

Patent Evaluation Based on Technological Trajectory Revealed

555

Table 2. Classiﬁcation of Top-Ranked Patents:
(p-value<0.05) from FS2

∗

denotes the signiﬁcant diﬀerence

(a) Top-10% ranked patent classiﬁcation

RF

SVM

features Precision Recall F-Score AUC

features Precision Recall F-Score AUC

FS1
FS2
FS3
FS4

0.1738
0.2110
∗
0.2251
∗
0.2354

0.6410
0.7186
∗
0.7430
∗
0.7613

0.2731
0.3259
∗
0.3452
∗
0.3920

0.6462
0.7057
∗
0.7250
∗
0.7389

FS1
FS2
FS3
FS4

0.1912
0.2208
0.2307
∗
0.2426

0.6541
0.7167
∗
0.7730
∗
0.7725

0.2956
0.3374
∗
0.3551
∗
0.3691

0.6683
0.7135
∗
0.7387
∗
0.7482

(b) Top-20% ranked patent classiﬁcation

RF

SVM

features Precision Recall F-Score AUC

features Precision Recall F-Score AUC

FS1
FS2
FS3
FS4

0.2976
0.3440
∗
0.3608
∗
0.3753

0.4018
0.6205
0.4526
0.6630
∗
0.6864 0.4728
∗
∗
0.7167
0.4925

0.6184
0.6664
∗
0.6846
∗
0.7027

FS1
FS2
FS3
FS4

0.3292
0.3627
0.3663
∗
0.3819

0.6337
0.6669
∗
0.7024
∗
0.7110

0.4329
0.4695
∗
0.4813
∗
0.4966

0.6483
0.6806
∗
0.6927
∗
0.7055

Table 3. Feature Analysis:
baseline

∗

denotes a signiﬁcant diﬀerence (p-value<0.05) from the

(a) Adding features

(b) Removing features

Featues

FS2

FS3

FS4

FS2

FS3

FS4

Base

C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6

0.4128
∗

0.4128
∗
∗

0.4128
∗
∗

17.83%

25.33%
15.06%
1.16% 2.67%
3.81%
0.73% 1.37% 1.90%
∗
12.57%
∗
19.30%
∗
18.40%

∗
6.52%
∗
9.62%
∗
10.21%

10.02%
14.08%
12.58%

∗
∗
∗

∗

0.4721 0.4908 0.5207
∗

-0.99% -3.00%
-2.21%
0.21% 0.01% 0.31%
0.13% -0.18% -0.09%
-0.04% -0.67% -0.11%
∗
-1.35%
-0.06% -1.66%
0.04% -0.50% -0.07%

∗

temporal patterns. It shows the signiﬁcant improvement (or decrease) when we
add into (or remove it from) the feature sets. Other important features are the
measure of assignee or technological class diversity in relevant prior patents or
backward citations (C5 and C6). When we add those features, the performance is
signiﬁcantly improved. C2 and C3 do not show the signiﬁcance, possibly because
the number of relevant prior patents and backward citations assigned to the same
assignee or invented by the same inventors is too small to reﬂect useful information
regarding patent value.

6 Conclusion

In this study, we propose a novel approach to evaluate newly granted patents,
using only information available at the time of patent grant. Our approach is to

556

S. Oh et al.

use the temporal patterns and trends of relevant prior patents that reﬂect the
novelty and technology state of a patent or the attractiveness of the technology
associated with a patent. The experimental results show that our approach can
achieve signiﬁcantly better evaluation performance by augmenting information
on relevant prior patents to backward citations. The feature analysis results
show that temporal patterns based on the distribution of relevant prior patents
and backward citations are important features in our proposed patent evaluation
models. Moreover, the measures on the dynamics regarding the diversity of other
assignees and other technology classes in relevant prior patents and backward
citations are highly related to patent value. Our approach based on temporal
trends of relevant prior patents is the ﬁrst of this kind, as an eﬀort to assess the
value of a new granted patent. Compared to previous works relying on rigorous
feature extraction or text analysis, our approach is much simpler and easier to
build patent evaluation models, and quite ﬂexible to expand.

Acknowledgement. This work is supported by U.S. National Science Foun-
dation Grant 5MA-1064194.

References

[1] Trajtenberg, M.: A penny for your quotes: patent citations and the value of inno-

vations. The Rand Journal of Economics, 172–187 (1990)

[2] Harhoﬀ, D., Narin, F., Scherer, F.M., Vopel, K.: Citation frequency and the value
of patented inventions. Review of Economics and Statistics 81(3), 511–515 (1999)
[3] Hall, B.H., Jaﬀe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M.: The nber patent citation data ﬁle:
Lessons, insights and methodological tools. Technical report, National Bureau
of Economic Research (2001)

[4] Hall, B.H., Jaﬀe, A., Trajtenberg, M.: Market value and patent citations. RAND

Journal of Economics, 16–38 (2005)

[5] Hasan, M.A., Spangler, W.S., Griﬃn, T., Alba, A.: Coa: Finding novel patents

through text analysis. In: CIKM, pp. 1175–1184. ACM (2009)

[6] Jin, X., Spangler, S., Chen, Y., Cai, K., Ma, R., Zhang, L., Wu, X., Han, J.:
Patent maintenance recommendation with patent information network model. In:
ICDM, pp. 280–289. IEEE (2011)

[7] Liu, Y., Hseuh, P.Y., Lawrence, R., Meliksetian, S., Perlich, C., Veen, A.: Latent
graphical models for quantifying and predicting patent quality. In: Proceedings of
the 17th ACM KDD. ACM (2011)

[8] Oh, S., Lei, Z., Mitra, P., Yen, J.: Evaluating and ranking patents using weighted
citations. In: Proceedings of the 12th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital
Libraries. ACM (2012)

[9] Hu, P., Huang, M., Xu, P., Li, W., Usadi, A.K., Zhu, X.: Finding nuggets in ip
portfolios: core patent mining through textual temporal analysis. In: Proceedings
of the 21st ACM CIKM. ACM (2012)

[10] Xue, X., Croft, W.B.: Automatic query generation for patent search. In: Proceed-

ings of the 18th ACM CIKM, pp. 2037–2040. ACM (2009)

[11] Strohman, T., Metzler, D., Turtle, H., Croft, W.B.: Indri: A language model-based
search engine for complex queries. In: Proceedings of the International Conference
on Intelligent Analysis, vol. 2(6) (2005)


