Player Performance Prediction in Massively

Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games

(MMORPGs)

Kyong Jin Shim, Richa Sharan, and Jaideep Srivastava

Department of Computer Science and Engineering

University of Minnesota

200 Union Street Southeast

{kjshim,srivasta}@cs.umn.edu, sharan.richa@gmail.com

Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA

Abstract. In this study, we propose a comprehensive performance man-
agement tool for measuring and reporting operational activities of game
players. This study uses performance data of game players in EverQuest
II, a popular MMORPG developed by Sony Online Entertainment, to
build performance prediction models for game players. The prediction
models provide a projection of player’s future performance based on his
past performance, which is expected to be a useful addition to exist-
ing player performance monitoring tools. First, we show that variations
of PECOTA [2] and MARCEL [3], two most popular baseball home run
prediction methods, can be used for game player performance prediction.
Second, we evaluate the eﬀects of varying lengths of past performance
and show that past performance can be a good predictor of future per-
formance up to a certain degree. Third, we show that game players do
not regress towards the mean and that prediction models built on buck-
ets using discretization based on binning and histograms lead to higher
prediction coverage.

1 Introduction

Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs) are personal
computer or console-based digital games where thousands of players can simul-
taneously sign on to the same online, persistent virtual world to interact and
collaborate with each other through their in-game characters. This study is con-
cerned with forecasting of player performance in the game. While many games
today provide web and GUI-based reports and dashboards for monitoring player
performance, we propose a more comprehensive performance management tool
(i.e. player scorecards) for measuring and reporting operational activities of game
players. This study uses operational and process-oriented performance data of
game players in EverQuest II, a popular MMORPG developed by Sony Online
Entertainment, to build performance prediction models for game players. First,
we show that variations of PECOTA [2] and MARCEL [3], two most popular
baseball home run prediction methods, can be used for game player performance

M.J. Zaki et al. (Eds.): PAKDD 2010, Part II, LNAI 6119, pp. 71–80, 2010.
c(cid:2) Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

72

K.J. Shim, R. Sharan, and J. Srivastava

prediction. Second, we evaluate the eﬀects of varying lengths of past performance
and show that past performance can be a good predictor of future performance
up to a certain degree. Third, we show that game players do not regress towards
the mean and that prediction models built on buckets using discretization based
on binning and histograms lead to higher prediction accuracy.

Systematic studies of game player performance is expected to yield the follow-
ing contributions. First, analysis of player performance in diﬀerent dimensions
(i.e. player demographics, archetypes, classes, sub-classes) can help game devel-
opers understand whether their games and game characters are being played as
intended. Second, beneﬁts for game players are two fold. a) Game players can not
only have a view of their past and current performance but also they can have a
view of their projected future performance. b) A recommendation engine can be
built to recommend character types and tasks to players in order to meet certain
objectives (i.e. move up to the next level as fast as possible, play safe by attempt-
ing easy tasks, play aggressively by attempting challenging tasks, play tasks that
encourage grouping with other players). Third, players can have a view of perfor-
mances of other players for the purposes of forming quest or raid teams.

2 EverQuest II Game Mechanics

2.1 Point-Scaling System in EverQuest II

In EverQuest II, there is a concept of Ding Points, which is the amount of points
one needs to obtain in order to move from one level to the next higher level [4].
For instance, to move from Level 2 to Level 3, one needs to obtain 1,000 points
whereas 20,000 points are required to move from Level 73 to 74. The amount
of ding points increases as one advances to the next level. As players gain more
experience with the game and advance to higher levels, the types of task they
can perform increase and the task diﬃculty also increases. The higher the task
diﬃculty, the higher the potential point gain.

2.2 Tasks in EverQuest II

EverQuest II is rich in types of task players can perform with monster kills being
one of the most popular. Monster kills are discussed in details in [1]. In addition to
monster kills, other sources of experience points exist in the game such as alternate
achievement points (AA) which can be obtained from quests, named mobs, and
discovery experience. A player can gain more experience points by having another
player mentor him. The mentor levels down to the level of the mentee. The mentee
receives a ﬁve percent bonus to adventuring experience points.

2.3 Archetypes, Classes, and Sub-classes in EverQuest II

In playing MMORPGs, selection of character type (i.e. archetype, class, sub-
class, and race) is considered an important decision as it deﬁnes the basis of

Player Performance Prediction in MMORPGs

73

opportunities and choices of roles and tasks within the game [5]. In EverQuest
II, there are four archetypes where each archetype consists of three classes each
of which in turn consists of two sub-classes [4]. Performance comparisons are
discussed in details in [7].

3 Baseball Home Run Prediction

Prediction of future performance of humans has long been studied in various dis-
ciplines over the years. Most notably, it has been well studied in sports. Baseball
has a long history of record keeping and statistical analyses that dates back to
the nineteenth century. Batting average, RBIs, and home runs are some of the
many statistics being kept track of today. There exists an enormous amount of
public and private interest in the projection of future performance. Major league
teams rely on the past statistics of a given player in deciding whether to acquire
him or not and for how many seasons under the assumption that his past success
is a good indicator of his future success.

PECOTA [2] and MARCEL [3] are widely known methods in baseball home
run prediction. PECOTA [2] is considered a very sophisticated method for home
run prediction in baseball. For a given ball player at the age of X, the method uses
a nearest neighbor analysis of both minor and major league players from the past
that exhibited similar performance at age X. It uses the historical performance
of these past players to predict the given player’s future performance. MARCEL
[3] uses data from the three immediate past seasons of a given ball player, and
it assigns more weight to more recent seasons. One drawback of this approach is
that prediction models solely based on individual players cannot be generalized
to the global population. A variation of the MARCEL approach attempts to
regress predictions to the global population mean. One drawback of this approach
is that prediction models built on the global population can become too coarse.
We consider game player levels in EverQuest II similar to seasons in baseball.
Players perform tasks, gain points, and move up to the next level as ball players
would attain diﬀerent types of achievement (i.e. home runs, single, double, triple
hits, run batted in, etc.) in each season and proceed to the next season. Unlike
in baseball where there is not necessarily a ﬁxed number of home runs, triples,
doubles, etc. required to move to the next season, EverQuest II employs a point
scaling system where there exists a ﬁxed number of experience points at each
level in order to move up to the next level. Because the ding point is a ﬁxed
constant, we measure a game player’s total play time at each level and uses it
as a performance measure in this study.

4 Player Performance Prediction in EverQuest II

In this study, we develop performance prediction models for game players in
EverQuest II. The objective is to predict a given player’s play time at level i, a
future state, based on his past performance at levels i − 1, i − 2, and so forth,
where performance at any level is measured as the total play time spent at that

74

K.J. Shim, R. Sharan, and J. Srivastava

level. Play time in EverQuest II excludes any idle periods where being idle is
deﬁned as any contiguous time blocks of 30 minutes or beyond.

4.1 Methods

MARCEL [3] method uses data from the three immediate past seasons of a given
ball player, and it assigns more weight to more recent seasons. One drawback
of this approach is that prediction models solely based on individual players
cannot be generalized to the global population. A variation of the MARCEL
approach attempts to regress predictions to the global population mean. One
drawback of this approach is that prediction models built on the global popula-
tion can become too coarse. Algorithm 1 [7] delineates the steps taken to generate
MARCEL-like prediction models for game player performance prediction.

Our preliminary data analysis of the game data reports that play times at
each player level exhibit a skewed distribution [7]. EverQuest II game players do
not regress towards the mean, and therefore prediction models built under the
assumption that they do regress towards the mean will become too coarse and
will perform poorly for players whose performances deviate from the mean. To
overcome this problem, for a given player, PECOTA [2] uses past performance of
those players whose performance patterns are similar to that of the given player.
In this study, we perform data discretization based on two unsupervised tech-
niques, binning and histogram analysis, in order to create buckets of players
where all players in a given bucket are termed neighbors. Neighbors share simi-
lar performance patterns, and a prediction model is built for each bucket. This is
similar to the way PECOTA [2] uses a nearest neighbor analysis to group players
into buckets and builds a prediction model for each bucket. Algorithms 2 and 3
[7] delineate the steps taken to create buckets based on binning and histogram
analysis, respectively. Algorithms 4 and 5 [7] delineate the steps taken to cre-
ate MARCEL-like prediction models and Regression-based prediction models,
respectively, both using discretization.

4.2 Dataset

The study uses one month worth of performance data from March 1, 2006 to
March 31, 2006. The dataset contains over 36 million player-to-task records
where over four million of them are monster kills related tasks. The dataset
contains 24,571 distinct players across player levels 1 through 70. Since then,
Sony Online Entertainment has added an additional ten levels to the game,
making 80 the maximum level one can reach.

All of the players and their performance data has been extracted from XP ta-
ble in the EverQuest II database housed at National Center for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois. The dataset contains at the
minimum the following information about game players: character id, character
sub-class, race, task, timestamp of task completion, group size (whether a given
character grouped with one or more other characters), average group level (if a

Player Performance Prediction in MMORPGs

75

given character played with one or more other characters, this value represents
the average of player levels of all players involved in that group), experience
points, location (location in which the task was completed).

4.3 Evaluation

In prediction (i.e. regression, time series analysis, etc.), a common practice has
been to specify coverage probabilities by convention, 90%, 95%, and 99% being
typical choices. A previous study [6] reports that academic writers concentrate
on 95% intervals while practical forecasters prefer 50% intervals. In this study,
we compute prediction coverage at varying conﬁdence intervals at 80% and 90%.
Algorithm 6 [7] delineates the steps taken to compute prediction coverage.

5 Experiments and Results

5.1 Past Performance as Indicator of Future Performance

A series of experiments have consistently shown that the three immediate past
levels contribute the most to the prediction of a player’s future performance.
Extending beyond the three immediate past levels does not positively contribute
to prediction coverage. One possible explanation might be that game players, in
playing tasks such as monster kills in EverQuest II, do not tend to degrade in
their performance suddenly, and therefore, a given player’s performance at the
most recent level (i − 1) should be most informative about his performance at
the current level (i). However, this may not necessarily be true in all cases such
as when a player all of a sudden decides to attempt monsters whose levels are
far beyond average, in which case, the player’s performance at the current level
may degrade due to the fact that his skill level is suddenly not matching the
task diﬃculty. Additionally, we try a variety of weighting schemes for use with
MARCEL [3] approach. Broadly, weighting functions are categorized into 1) even
weight distribution and 2) decaying weight distribution. The former assigns an
equal amount of conﬁdence to each of the past levels whereas the latter assigns
more weight to more immediate past levels. Our ﬁndings suggest that with the
three immediate past levels, both even weight distribution and decaying weight
distribution produce comparative results.

5.2 Discretization Improves Prediction Coverage

Given the dataset used in our analysis, our ﬁndings suggest that the bucket
number of six leads to high prediction coverage. In some player levels though
we observe that a bucket number slightly lower or higher than six leads to even
higher prediction coverage.

Our results show that discretization using binning and histogram analysis
leads to higher prediction coverage overall across all 70 player levels where the
number of buckets is six. Figure 1 shows that MARCEL [3] approach produces

76

K.J. Shim, R. Sharan, and J. Srivastava

Fig. 1. Discretization Improves Prediction Coverage (MARCEL approach)

an average prediction coverage of 82.4% whereas the same approach employing
binning produces 84.7% and that employing histogram analysis produces 86%
prediction coverage (conﬁdence interval of 80%). Figure 2 shows results consis-
tent with MARCEL approach where the base linear regression model produces
an average prediction coverage of 83.2% whereas the model employing binning
produces 85% and that employing histogram analysis produces 85.7% prediction
coverage (conﬁdence interval of 80%).

Fig. 2. Discretization Improves Prediction Coverage (Linear Regression)

5.3 Comparison of Prediction Models

Figure 3 shows prediction coverage computed at conﬁdence interval of 80%.
MARCEL [3] approach in combination with histogram-based discretization per-
forms the best while all other schemes produce results that are comparative to
that of MARCEL [3] approach.

Player Performance Prediction in MMORPGs

77

Fig. 3. Comparison of Prediction Models (80% Interval)

Fig. 4. Comparison of Prediction Models (80% Interval)

Figure 4 charts the average prediction coverage computed at conﬁdence in-
terval of 80% across 70 player levels. MARCEL [3] approach in combination
with histogram-based discretization performs the best while all other schemes
produce results that are comparative to that of MARCEL [3] approach.

Figure 5 shows prediction coverage computed at conﬁdence interval of 90%.
Linear regression model in combination with binning-based discretization per-
forms the best while all other schemes produce results that are comparative to
that of linear regression model.

78

K.J. Shim, R. Sharan, and J. Srivastava

Fig. 5. Comparison of Prediction Models (90% Interval)

Fig. 6. Comparison of Prediction Models (90% Interval)

Figure 6 charts the average prediction coverage computed at conﬁdence inter-
val of 90% across 70 player levels. Linear regression model in combination with
binning-based discretization performs the best while all other schemes produce
results that are comparative to that of linear regression model.

Our prediction models capture information essential about the relationship
between progression of player level and progression of player performance (as a
function of play time) over a range of three player levels. Our results consistently
show that the relationship is linear to a certain extent. This trend is observed
across all 70 player levels.

Player Performance Prediction in MMORPGs

79

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we show that variations of PECOTA [2] and MARCEL [3], two
most popular baseball home run prediction methods, can be used for game player
performance prediction. MARCEL approach in combination with bucketing in-
spired from PECOTA approach leads to high prediction coverage. The method
uses data from the three immediate past levels and assigns more weight to more
recent levels. In game player performance prediction, our ﬁndings suggest that
the results from even weight distribution and decay weight distribution are com-
parative. To account for an observation that game players in EverQuest II do
not regress towards the mean in terms of their play times, prediction models
are built on buckets using discretization based on binning and histograms. This
approach leads to higher prediction coverage. Further, we build regression-based
models and show that the relationship between progression of player level and
progression of player performance (as a function of play time) over a range of
time is linear to a certain extent. The regression-based models produce prediction
coverage comparative to that of existing methods.

Prediction models we propose in this study are expected to be a useful addition
to many existing player performance monitoring tools by providing a projection
of a given player’s future performance given his past performance. Game player
performance data such as that of EverQuest II is rich of not only outcome data
(i.e. number of monsters killed, number of experience points gained, number
of deaths occurred, number of quests completed in a given time duration) but
also process data, from which we can construct a progression of a given player’s
performance at any given time point. Existing player performance monitoring
tools can be greatly enhanced to dynamically capture player performance pro-
gression, provide instant feedback on player’s progress, and recommend tasks
tailored towards a given player’s objectives of playing the game (performance-
oriented tasks vs. social activity-oriented).

7 Future Directions

An extension to the current work involves investigating model dynamics by ex-
amining the balancing of past consistency with advancing player level. An is-
sue arises when a player performs way below the average for a couple of levels
and springs back up to a very good performance. All of the prediction models
discussed in this study so far lack the ability to integrate such dynamics into
prediction. Another extension to the present study seeks to deﬁne performance
in many dimensions of diﬀerent granularity levels (i.e. task types, archetypes,
classes, sub-classes, races, roles, etc.). For instance, the present study deﬁnes
performance as a function of play time or active time. Another measure of per-
formance is the level of consistency and commitment. Results from such analyses
can reveal player behavioral patterns indicative of player churning. Yet another
addition to this study is to leverage a variety of social networks in EverQuest II
(i.e. housing network, trust network, raid group network, and guild network) to
measure the impact of social interactions on player performance.

80

K.J. Shim, R. Sharan, and J. Srivastava

Acknowledgments

The research reported herein was supported by the National Science Founda-
tion via award number IIS-0729421, and the Army Research Institute via award
number W91WAW-08-C-0106. The data used for this research was provided by
the SONY corporation. We gratefully acknowledge all our sponsors. The ﬁndings
presented do not in any way represent, either directly or through implication, the
policies of these organizations. Acknowledgements are also due to the members
of the University of Minnesota, Northwestern University, University of South-
ern California, University of Illinois, University of Michigan, and University of
Chicago.

References

1. Shim, K.J., Ahmad, M., Pathak, N., Srivastava, J.: Inferring Player Rating from Per-
formance Data in Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs),
cse. In: International Conference on Computational Science and Engineering, vol. 4,
pp. 1199–1204 (2009)

2. Silver, N.: Introducing PECOTA, pp. 507–514. Baseball Prospectus, Hyattsville

(2003)

3. Tango, T.: Marcel The Monkey Forecasting System. Tangotiger .net,

http://www.tangotiger.net/archives/stud0346.shtml (March 10, 2004)

4. Prima Development. Everquest II: Oﬃcial Strategy Guide (Prima Oﬃcial Game

Guides)

5. http://pc.gamespy.com/pc/everquest-ii/564411p1.html
6. Granger, C.W.J.: Can We Improve the Perceived Quality of Economic Forecasts?

Journal of Applied Econometrics 11, 455–473 (1996)

7. Shim, K.J., Sharan, R., Srivastava, J.: Player Performance Prediction in Massively
Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs), Technical Report 10-003,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota


